Ales Parez (born April 9, 1981) is an ex-professional ice hockey player working with professional athletes to improve their performance and strength & conditioning. Ales began playing hockey in North America at Wyoming Seminary (Kingston, PA), a boarding school he attended for four years. After graduating from this high school, Parez spent time in two American Junior programs: first with the Bismarck Bobcats NAHL and then with the Chicago Steel of the USHL. In his one and only season with Chicago, Parez managed more than 40 points in just over 60 games. Parez then progressed to playing hockey at NCAA level for the University of Alaska Anchorage and proved to be a regular player for the team, featuring in 120 games in the four years he spent there, and totaling almost 80 points. After his University level career ended, Parez went through an unsuccessful rookie camp of the Washington Capitals. After that, Ales moved back to Europe and signed for the EIHL team Manchester Phoenix as a replacement for departing forward Robin Gomez. Parez was again productive for the Phoenix, and in 24 games managed to grab 26 points. Along with his teammate Adam Radmall, Parez was not re-signed in the summer by the Phoenix and moved to play EPL for the Milton Keynes Lightning. Parez has proved to be an excellent signing for the Lightning and has continued to rack up points. Since then, Ales has had several shoulder injuries which forced him to stop playing at a competitive level. Since 2012, Ales is involved in training of elite athletes as well as general public looking to improve performance and reduce pain. Ales' education is continuously improving as he's attending Paul Chek institute based in California, USA. In 2015, Ales Returned to the Czech Republic after 20 years abroad and joined a professional ice hockey team Bili Tygri Liberec. Ales is responsible for strength & conditioning for this club and he also trains professional athletes who play in North America such as David Pastrnak (NHL), Martin Sevc (Sweden), Roman Will (NHL), Jakub Vrana (NHL), Michal Kempny (NHL) and others. ==External links== * *Ales Parez Personal Profile, Manchester Phoenix Official Website. Category:1981 births Category:Czech ice hockey forwards Category:Living people Category:Manchester Phoenix players Category:Alaska Anchorage Seawolves men's ice hockey players Category:People from Nymburk 
