Camp of Great Poland (, OWP) was a far-right, Oboz Wielkiej Polski , Encyklopedia PWN nationalist political organization of National Democracy in interwar Poland. ==History== Camp of Great Poland was founded on 4 December 1926 in Poznan by Popular National Union (Zwiazek Ludowo-Narodowy, ZLN) and other organizations of right-wing National Democracy political camp, led by Roman Dmowski, to unite Polish right-wing organizations and oppose sanacja regime, which gained power following Jozef Pilsudski's May Coup in 1926.Wapinski 1980, 264-265. After merging with National Pupulist Union in 1928 OWP retained its autonomy within newly established National Party (). In 1927 youth branch of the organization was established ()., which virtually dominated OWP by 1928. OWP positions in Polish universities among students were especially strong, it also gained popularity among workers and the lower middle class.Michlic, p.316 In January 1930 Camp of Great Poland had 35,000 members, in May 1932 its membership reached 120,000. By 1933 OWP claimed to have a quarter of a million followers. Outbreaks of the anti-Jewish violence in Eastern Galicia in 1927 led the organization to be banned in that region that year. Diapozytyw: Slownik terminow: Antysemityzm After a further wave of nationwide violence in 1933 OWP eventually banned in entire Poland. Government, alarmed by rapid growth of OWP, banned the organization together with its youth movement on 28 March 1933.Wapinski 1980, 299. on the grounds that these organizations threatened stability of the state. After dissolution of the organization, even more radical young members of OWP formed the National Radical Camp (). ONR would be banned soon after its establishment, in 1934. ==Organization== Camp of Great Poland was led by the Great Council (). The head of the Council, with the title of the Great Camp-maker () was Roman Dmowski; other notable members included Tadeusz Bielecki, Marian Borzecki, Stanislaw Haller and Roman Rybarski. Oboz Wielkiej Polski Encyklopedia WIEM ==Views== Camp of Great Poland supported strongly religious corporative authoritarianism, borrowing some ideas from Italian fascism. OWP did not pursue its goals on the political scene, increasingly controlled by Pilsudskiite Sanacja; instead it aimed to create a violent, revolutionary movement aimed at toppling the government. Camp of Great Poland even had its own fighting squads organized. OWP front organization, the Green Ribbon League () actively propagated a boycott of the Jewish-owned businesses. In early 1930s OWP campaigned for numerus nullus, a policy of complete exclusion of Jewish students and academics from Polish universities. OWP anti-Jewish activities weren't however limited to political means only. OWP openly incited anti-Jewish riots, and its youth movement advocated violence against Jewish students. OWP and related youth organizations were engaged in violent attacks against Jews. Those attacks eventually led the Polish government to ban the organization. == Today's Poland == Organization was many times re-established, the first time as political party in Lublin (1993) by prof. Jan Trochimiak. After founded in 2003 as an ordinary association in Wroclaw. Finally, in 2012 the OWP was registered in the National Registrar of Companies and Legal Entities (Krajowy Rejestr Sadowy; KRS) in Warsaw, gaining legal personality. Honorary chairman of the OWP is Jan Kobylanski. ==See also== * Camp of Great Poland (association) ==Footnotes== ==References== * Category:1926 establishments in Poland Category:1933 disestablishments in Poland Category:Catholic political parties Category:Corporatism Category:Defunct political parties in Poland Category:Far-right political parties in Poland Category:Nationalist parties in Poland Category:Polish nationalist parties Category:Political history of Poland Category:Political parties disestablished in 1933 Category:Political parties established in 1926 
