Captain Luis Fernando Gomez Nino Air Base ( , also known as Apiay Air Base (Base Aerea de Apiay), is a Colombian military base assigned to the Colombian Air Force (Fuerza Aerea Colombiana or FAC) Combat Air Command No. 2 (Comando Aereo de Combate No. 2 or CACOM 2). CACOM 2 - Apiay (Meta) - Comando Aereo de Combate No.2 It also hosts members of the Colombian Army and Colombian Navy. The base is located in Apiay, near the city of Villavicencio, in the Department of Meta in central Colombia, by the steps of the Andes mountain range and the plains of the Colombian Llanos. The base also hosts members of the United States Military under a cooperation program under Plan Colombia intended to help the Colombian military with the eradication of illegal drug trade and the illegally armed groups in the Colombian armed conflict. Apiay has served as base for operations such as Plan Patriota which included operations such as Operation JM. == History == The current Combat Air Command No. 2 (Comando Aereo de Combate No. 2) was established in 1933, in the jungle, with the name San Jose del Guaviare Air Base (Base Aerea San Jose del Guaviare). In December 1947 it moved to the village of Apiay, from Villavicencio, to become the Apiay National Airfield (Aerodromo Nacional de Apiay), an auxiliary to Madrid Air Base. In 1956 it was equipped with AT-6 Texan and T-34 Mentor aircraft, to provide training to pilots recently graduated from the Military Aviation School (Escuela Militar de Aviacion). In 1959 the unit was elevated to a main base with the assignment of B-26 aircraft moved from the Palanquero Air Base, changing its name to Comando Aereo de Bombardeo. In 1961 it received the name Luis F. Gomez Nino Air Base as a tribute to Captain Luis F. Gomez Nino (1896-1934), a Colombian military aviator.Capitan Luis F. Gomez Nino In 1972, the base receives its first jet aircraft, T-33 and T-37, brought from the Combat Air Command No.1, and changes its name to the present day name of Combat Air Command No.2. Today, the air base has responsibility for over 600.000 km2 Resena Historica: Comando Aereo de Combate No 2 Resena Historica: Capitan Luis F. Gomez Nino == Facilities == The air base resides at an elevation of above mean sea level. It has one runway designated 10/28 with an asphalt surface measuring . ==Accidents and incidents== *On 8 September 1969, Douglas C-47 FAC-685 of SATENA crashed near Apiay Air Force Base killing all 32 people on board. The aircraft was operating a domestic scheduled passenger flight from Monterrey Airport to Apiay. ==References== Category:1933 establishments in Colombia Category:Airports in Colombia Category:Colombian Air Force Category:Buildings and structures in Meta Department Category:Military installations of Colombia Category:Military airbases established in 1933 
