Cedric Baseya (born 19 December 1987 in Bretigny-sur-Orge, Essonne) is a DR Congolese-French professional footballer. ==Club career== Baseya is a right forward who formerly played for Southampton in the English Championship. On 17 November 2007, he made his debut with Crewe Alexandra after signing for them on loan for one month the previous day.www.soccerbase.com - The Internet Soccer DatabaseCedric Grew In Confidence , crewealex.net He made his Southampton debut as a last-minute substitute against Ipswich Town on 1 March 2008 but didn't touch the ball in the short time he was on the pitch. Baseya moved to Lille on a Bosman on 2 July 2008, and was loaned out on 10 August 2009 to Le Havre AC.Alexandre Bonnet et Cedric Baseya arrivent au HAC On 21 September 2011, Baseya signed a 12-month contract with Reading. On 24 November 2011, he was loaned out on a short-term deal to League Two side Barnet, making his debut on 25 November in a 2-1 home win against Macclesfield Town when he came on as a second-half substitute for Mark Marshall. At the end of the season, 2 May 2012, Baseya was released by Reading. In November 2013 Baseya joined Bulgarian A PFG side PFC Lokomotiv Sofia on a two-year contract. Baseya scored on his Lokomotiv debut, coming on as a 57th-minute substitute and scoring in the 69th minute, in a 2-1 defeat against Chernomorets Burgas. Baseya made his first start for Lokomotiv in their next game, a 2-0 away win over Slavia Sofia in which he scored the first goal, in the second leg of the second round of the Bulgarian Cup. Baseya played for Monza in 2015. ==International career== Although born in France, he qualifies to play for the Democratic Republic of Congo via his parents. He was called up for their full international side but the game was cancelled and he has since represented them at Under 20 level in a 2-1 defeat by Argentina. ==References== ==External links== *Player profile on Southampton's website * Category:1987 births Category:Living people Category:People from Bretigny-sur-Orge Category:French people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Category:Association football forwards Category:French footballers Category:Democratic Republic of the Congo footballers Category:French expatriate footballers Category:Southampton F.C. players Category:Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Category:Lille OSC players Category:AS Cherbourg Football players Category:Reading F.C. players Category:Barnet F.C. players Category:FC Lokomotiv 1929 Sofia players Category:A.C. Monza players Category:Ligue 1 players Category:English Football League players Category:First Professional Football League (Bulgaria) players Category:Expatriate footballers in England Category:Democratic Republic of the Congo expatriates in the United Kingdom Category:Expatriate footballers in Bulgaria Category:Expatriate footballers in Italy Category:Sportspeople from Essonne 
