Char Fasson Government College is a government educational institution located on the back of Principal Nazrul Islam Road, 1960 feet west of Bhola-Char Fasson Road. It is one of the colleges in Bhola. Established in 1968, the college is one of the oldest schools in Bhola district and one of the best in South Bengal. In this college higher secondary and undergraduate level educational activities are conducted. The college is surrounded by beautiful and captivating natural environment. This college is affiliated to Bangladesh National University and Barisal Education Board. == History of establishment== Char Fasson is a coastal town of Bhola, a land of polymer. The social system here has evolved through the inevitable burning of the isolated culture of the people who have broken the river. Although the culture of the community has not developed here, the society is aware of how many talented people have left their mark on creative thinking from time to time. Char Fasson College is the fruit of the talent and labor of all those geniuses. In the late fifties, an initiative was taken to set up a Char Fasson College under the leadership of A. Haq Master, the headmaster of Charfashion Govt. T. Baret Secondary School. According to him, the entrepreneurs submitted an application to the then sub-divisional administrator MA Aziz to set up Char Fassson College. Until then Bhola College was not established. Then the sub- divisional administrator said, when there is no college in Bhola, Char Fasson is a union, how can a college be established there! AH Haque Master told him to come and establish a college here. In 1982, he became the founding principal of Bhola Government College. Then the establishment of Char Fasson College was somewhat hampered, but did not stop. On June 1, 1986, dignitaries of the time, market traders, social workers and people's representatives all gathered at the Brajgopal Public Club. The meeting, chaired by Abdul Motaleb Master, a prominent person of the area, took a formal decision to establish Char Fasson College. A 143-member organizing committee was formed. Founder President of the College Committee, Sub-Divisional Administrator, Secretary Abdul Matin, Joint Secretary Fazlur Rahman Faraji, Treasurer Md. Samsuddin Master. At the first day's meeting, the treasurer paid ten thousand TK in cash. The then eminent person Char Fasson TB High School headmaster M. M. Nazrul Islam appointed, the head of Char Fasson TB School, as the principal of Char Fasson College. On August 1, 1986, he joined Char Fasson College as the principal. The first activities of the college started at Brajgopal Public Club. ==Recognition== On 1 July 1986, the Jessore Board of Education recognized Char Fasson College in the first humanities and science branch and on 1 July 1969 in the business education branch. Degree, Arts and Commerce was obtained on 16 July 1970. 6 July 2000 B.Sc. The National University Authority launched Honors courses in Political Science, Management, Accounting and History and Social Work on 30 January 2013. ==Installation== ==Establishment of examination center== Secondary examination centre was established in 1982 and in 1989 degree examination centre was Established. In 2013 honours testing Centre was also established. ==Result== In the Higher Secondary Certificate Examination 2007, he was in the top ten in the Barisal Board of Education. In 2001, the best college was selected based on the results of the degree course. Besides, Barisal Education Board is 16th out of the top 20 in Higher Secondary 2011. 12th in 2012 and 18th in 2014 ==Governmentization== On 11 June 2013, the Prime Minister's Office sent a letter of consent from the Prime Minister to the Ministry of Education. The inspection team formed by the Department of Secondary Higher Education to make the college a government college visited on 23 June 2013. On 22nd July, 2013, the Ministry of Education sent a letter of Deed of Gift for the transfer of all movable and immovable property to the Government, including the ban on transfer of immovable property, promotion, promotion of the college for government purposes. According to the decision of the meeting of the Governing Body dated 2 August 2013, the Deed of Gift was executed on behalf of Char Fasson College on behalf of the Principal along with His Excellency the President in the document No. 365 dated 14 August 2013. Then on 22nd October 2013, the Ministry of Education issued a memorandum No. 9 / S.K.-18/2013/518 to the Charfason College from 11th October 2013. Charfason Government College was made official and was registered in the Bangladesh Gazette on 31 October 2013. ==Campus== ==Faculties and Departments== * Political science * Social work * History * Management * Accounting science * Arts * Science * Business education ==References== Category:1967 establishments in Pakistan Category:Universities and colleges in Bhola District Category:Char Fasson Upazila 
