Daniel Dhers (born March 25, 1985, in Caracas, Venezuela) is a professional BMX rider. He is currently sponsored by Red Bull, POC, DC Shoes, Specialized, Albe's Mailorder, and Verizon. Dhers lived in Greenville, North Carolina, known as Protown USA because of the strong concentration of BMX riders that live there, including Dave Mirra.Dhers is a hero to a lot of young BMX riders. When they start riding they look at the way he rides and the type of bike that he rides and tries to copy it. Dhers moved to Holly Springs, North Carolina in late 2013 and opened a public mountain biking, BMX, and skateboarding park, the Daniel Dhers Action Sports Complex. ==Career== Dhers began riding BMX when he was twelve years old to socialize with friends and in 1998 he visited his first skatepark. At age 16 Dhers moved with his parents to Buenos Aires, Argentina which allowed him to ride with more experienced riders than he had previously, which in turn fuelled his progression and in 2003 he entered his first contest. In 2006 Dhers moved to the United States and immediately won the Dew Action Sports Tour, which he would go on to win again in 2007, 2008, and 2010. He would also win gold medals at the X Games in 2007, 2008, and 2010. He was also featured on several episodes of the American TV program Nitro Circus. Dhers is one of the most decorated BMX riders of all time. ==Daniel Dhers Action Sports Complex== In 2013 Dhers and Abel Zalcberg founded the Daniel Dhers Action Sports Complex, which opened on May 3, 2014 in North Carolina. The 37,000-square-foot family-oriented BMX, scooter and skateboarding facility includes both indoor and outdoor parks. ==References== ==External links== * * * AST Dew Tour Profile * Daniel Dhers Action Sports Complex Category:1985 births Category:Living people Category:X Games athletes Category:BMX riders Category:People from Caracas Category:Venezuelan male cyclists Category:People from Holly Springs, North Carolina Category:Pan American Games medalists in cycling Category:Pan American Games gold medalists for Venezuela Category:Cyclists at the 2019 Pan American Games 
