Daniel Christopher Rocco (born July 16, 1960)1995 University of Texas Football Media Guide p. 94 is the head coach of the Delaware Fightin' Blue Hens college football team representing the University of Delaware. Rocco has previously been the head coach of the Liberty Flames and Richmond Spiders. He is also a former assistant coach of the New York Jets of the National Football League (NFL). Rocco earned his bachelor's degree in speech communication from Wake Forest University in 1984. He added an education and counseling master's degree from Wake Forest in 1987. ==Playing career== Rocco played linebacker for Joe Paterno at Pennsylvania State University, earning letters in 1979 and 1980. He played in the 1979 Liberty Bowl and the 1980 Fiesta Bowl for the Nittany Lions. Rocco transferred to Wake Forest University, where he started for two seasons at outside linebacker under head coach Al Groh, in 1982 and 1983. He was named captain of the 1983 Wake Forest Demon Deacons football team. ==Coaching career== Throughout his coaching career, Rocco has been a friend and protege of Al Groh, working with him for over six years in both collegiate and professional positions. Rocco began his coaching career as a graduate assistant then defensive line coach at Wake Forest, from 1984 to 1986. After a season coaching linebackers at the University of Colorado at Boulder under Bill McCartney, he spent three seasons at the University of Tulsa. Next stop for Rocco was Boston College for three years under Tom Coughlin as defensive line coach. ===Liberty=== Rocco was named the head coach of the Flames on December 2, 2005, succeeding Ken Karcher. He began his first stint as a head coach at any level taking over a program that went 1-10 the season before he arrived in 2005. In his first season as head coach at Liberty in 2006, he led the Flames to a 6-5 record and was honored by the Big South Conference as their Coach of the Year. He then followed that up in 2007 by leading the Flames to an 8-3 record and the school's first Big South Conference championship and his second consecutive Coach of the Year honors. In February 2008, the university extended Rocco's contract through the 2012 season. He then followed that up with another Big South championship in 2008 with a 5-0 record in league play. He was named Big South Coach of the Year for the third straight season. In 2009, he stretched the Flames' Big South winning streak to a conference record 15 games before falling in the season finale at Stony Brook. Liberty shared the conference championship with the Seawolves. In 2010, a loss at Coastal Carolina led to a three-way share of the league title with the Chanticleers and Stony Brook. But CCU went to the playoffs based on a tie-breaker of point allowed in conference games. In January 2010, Rocco signed a two-year contract extension through the 2014 season. On December 6, 2011, Rocco was named head coach at the University of Richmond. On December 13, 2016, Rocco was named head coach at the University of Delaware. ==Head coaching record== ==References== ==External links== * Delaware profile Category:1960 births Category:Living people Category:American football linebackers Category:Boston College Eagles football coaches Category:Colorado Buffaloes football coaches Category:Delaware Fightin' Blue Hens football coaches Category:Liberty Flames football coaches Category:Maryland Terrapins football coaches Category:New York Jets coaches Category:Penn State Nittany Lions football players Category:Richmond Spiders football coaches Category:Texas Longhorns football coaches Category:Tulsa Golden Hurricane football coaches Category:Virginia Cavaliers football coaches Category:Wake Forest Demon Deacons football coaches Category:Wake Forest Demon Deacons football players Category:People from Huntingdon, Pennsylvania Category:Players of American football from Pennsylvania Category:Coaches of American football from Pennsylvania 
