Daughters of Darkness (in France, Les Levres Rouges, in Belgium, Le Rouge aux Levres (the former literally translated as The Red Lips and the latter as The Red on the Lips) and in the Netherlands, Dorst Naar Bloed (meaning Thirst for Blood) is a 1971 English-language Belgian horror film directed by Harry Kumel and starring Delphine Seyrig, Danielle Ouimet, John Karlen, and Andrea Rau. It is an erotic vampire film. ==Plot summary== A recently married young couple, Stefan (John Karlen) and Valerie (Danielle Ouimet), are on their honeymoon. They check into a grand hotel on the Ostend seafront in Belgium, intending to catch the cross-channel ferry to England, though Stefan seems oddly unenthusiastic at the prospect of introducing his new bride to his mother. It is off-season, so the couple are alone in the hotel. Alone, that is, until the sun sets and a mysterious Hungarian countess, Elizabeth Bathory (Delphine Seyrig) arrives in a vintage Bristol driven by her "secretary", Ilona (Andrea Rau). The middle-aged concierge at the hotel swears that he saw the Countess at the same hotel when he was a little boy. The pair may have a connection to three separate gruesome murders of young girls that occurred in Bruges the previous week. On a day trip, Stefan and Valerie witness the aftermath of a fourth. At the hotel, the Countess quickly becomes obsessed with the newlyweds and the resulting interaction of the four people leads to sadism and murder. First Ilona, then Stefan, then the Countess dies, leaving Valerie, now transformed into a creature similar to the Countess, stalking new victims. ==Production== Director Kumel, interviewed by Mark Gatiss for the BBC documentary Horror Europa said that he deliberately styled Delphine Seyrig's character after Marlene Dietrich and Andrea Rau's after Louise Brooks to deepen the intertextual resonance. Because the vampire character of Elizabeth Bathory is also a demagogue, Kumel dressed her in the Nazi colours of black, white and red. In commenting on both the film's mordant sense of humour and the director's painterly eye in the composition of several scenes, Gatiss drew forth the comment from Kumel that he considers the film very Belgian, especially due to the influence of Surrealism and Expressionism. Extensive external shooting was done at the Royal Galleries of Ostend, a seaside neoclassical arcade on the beach at Ostend (especially at the luxury Grand Hotel des Thermes, which sits atop the central section of the arcade). The interior shooting was done at the Hotel Astoria, Brussels and other exteriors at the Tropical Gardens, Meise. ==Interpretation== The critic Camille Paglia writes in Sexual Personae (1990) that Daughters of Darkness is a good example of a "classy genre of vampire film" that "follows a style I call psychological high Gothic." Paglia sees this "abstract and ceremonious" style, which depicts evil as "hierarchical glamour" and deals with "eroticized western power", as beginning in Samuel Taylor Coleridge's poem Christabel, Edgar Allan Poe's short story "Ligeia", and Henry James's novella The Turn of the Screw.Paglia, Camille. Sexual Personae: Art and Decadence from Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson. Yale University Press, 1990, p. 268. According to the critic Geoffrey O'Brien: > Lesbian vampires made frequent incursions in the early 1970's--in movies > ranging from hardcore pornographic to dreamily aesthetic -- as the Gothic > horror movie took to flaunting its psychosexual subtexts. Daughters of > Darkness leans flamboyantly toward the artistic end of the spectrum, with > Delphine Seyrig sporting Marienbad-like costumes and the Belgian director > conjuring up images of luxurious decadence replete with feathers, mirrors, > and long, winding hotel corridors. At the film's core, however, is a deeply > unpleasant evocation of a war of nerves between Seyrig's vampire and the > bourgeois newlyweds into whose honeymoon she insinuates herself. Jaded age > preys cunningly on narcissistic youth, and seductiveness and cruelty become > indistinguishable as Seyrig forces the innocents to become aware of their > own capacity for monstrous behavior. If Fassbinder had made a vampire movie > it might have looked something like this.O'Brien, Geoffrey (1993), "Horror > for Pleasure", New York Review of Books (22 April issue). ==Reception== In the early 2010s, Time Out conducted a poll with several authors, directors, actors and critics who have worked within the horror genre to vote for their top horror films. Daughters of Darkness placed at number 90 on their top 100 list. The movie rating aggregator Rotten Tomatoes rates the movie with 73% tomatoes on 15 ratings.Daughters of Darkness ==References== ==External links== * * * * * Daughters of Darkness trailer at Archive.org Category:1971 films Category:1971 horror films Category:1971 LGBT-related films Category:Belgian films Category:Belgian horror films Category:Belgian LGBT-related films Category:English-language French films Category:Films directed by Harry Kumel Category:Films scored by Francois de Roubaix Category:Films set in Belgium Category:Films shot in Bruges Category:French films Category:French horror films Category:French LGBT-related films Category:German horror films Category:German LGBT-related films Category:Gothic horror films Category:LGBT-related horror films Category:Vampires in film Category:West German films Category:Cultural depictions of Elizabeth Bathory 
