David E. Keyes is the Director of the Extreme Computing Center at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST). He was the inaugural Dean of the Division of Computer, Electrical, and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering (CEMSE) at KAUST and remains an adjunct professor in Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics at Columbia University and an affiliate of several laboratories of the U.S. Department of Energy. With backgrounds in engineering, applied mathematics, and computer science, he works at the algorithmic interface between parallel computing and the numerical analysis of partial differential equations, across a spectrum of aerodynamic, geophysical, and chemically reacting flows. ==Professional career== Keyes graduated summa cum laude in Aerospace and Mechanical Sciences from Princeton in 1978 and earned a doctorate in Applied Mathematics from Harvard University in 1984. He served on the faculties of Yale, Old Dominion, and Columbia Universities before taking up his current post in 2009. He is the author or editor of more than a dozen federal agency reports and member of several federal advisory committees on computational science and engineering and high performance computing. As of November 11, 2015, his works have been cited 6125 times, and he has an h-index of 39. ==Awards and honors== He was awarded an NSF Presidential Young Investigator Award in 1989. For his algorithmic influence in scientific simulation, Dr. Keyes was recognized as a Fellow of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, with the Sidney Fernbach Award of the IEEE Computer Society, and with ACM's Gordon Bell Prize. In 2011, Dr. Keyes received the SIAM Prize for Distinguished Service to the Profession.SIAM Prize for Distinguished Service to the Profession, retrieved 2017-08-15. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society, retrieved 2013-01-27. ==References== ==External links== * David E. Keyes Homepage at Columbia University Category:Columbia School of Engineering and Applied Science faculty Category:Harvard University alumni Category:Fellows of the American Mathematical Society Category:Living people Category:Fellows of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Category:Princeton University alumni Category:Applied mathematicians Category:Year of birth missing (living people) 
