Dimitrije "Mita" T. Leko (; January 22, 1863 - September 24, 1914) was a renowned Serbian architect and urbanist. ==Biography== He spent most of his life outside Serbia and finished high school in Winterthur before studying architecture at the universities in Zurich (Technische Hochschule), Aachen, and Munich. After returning to Belgrade at the end of the 19th century, he tried to implement the model of contemporary urbanism of western Europe in Belgrade. He designed some of the most important and technically perfected buildings in Belgrade of his time, such as the Belgrade Meteorological Station in 1891, the Vuco House on Slavija Square in 1893 (the first McDonald's restaurant in Eastern Europe was opened in this building on March 24, 1988The History of McDonald's in Serbia ), the New Military Academy on Nemanja Street (Nemanjina ulitsa) in 1899 (today's Belgrade City MuseumBelgrade City Museum: The New Museum Building arte.rs: About Belgrade City Museum), the Athens Palace on Terazije Square in 1902, Dorde Vuco's house on the Sava River on Karadorde Street (Karadjordjeva ulitsa) in 1908, the school buildings in Mackenzie Street (Ulitsa Makenzijeva) and Gavrilo Princip Street (Ulitsa Gavrila Printsipa) and many other structures and mansions.Divna Duric-Zamolo: Graditelji Beograda 1815-1914, Belgrade, 1980Nikola B. Nestorovic: Gradevine i arhitekti u Beogradu proslog stoleca, Udruzenje jugosl. inzenjera i arhitekata - Klub arhitekata, Belgrade, 1937 He also designed a chapel that was built to enclose what was left of the Skull Tower in Nis. Several of his works were financed by one of the wealthiest merchants in Belgrade at the end of the 19th century, Dorde Vuco. Leko also won first prizes on the open competitions for the regulation of Terazije Square, Little Kalemegdan, and the city of Skopje. However, these projects were never fully realized. Astronomical Observatory and Meteorological Observatory of Belgrade University. Leko was also a very harsh critic of the urban development of Belgrade. He was often labelled as "too provocative" and "revolutionary" in his criticism of urbanism in Belgrade, and some of the problems he addressed, such as the problem of the regulation of the Terazije Terrace and the banks of the Sava River, still remain unsolved.Dimitrije T. Leko and Belgrade Salon of Architecture 2006 Leko was a member of Belgrade's prestigious Leko family. His brother, Marko Leko, was a renowned chemist. A street in the Belgrade suburb of Borca bears Dimitrije T. Leko's name. == References == == External links == *Dimitrije T. Leko biography *Dimitrije T. Leko and Belgrade Salon of Architecture 2006 *Leko family history *Leko family grave Category:1863 births Category:1914 deaths Category:Serbian architects Category:Serbian people of Greek descent 
