Dyrosaurus is a genus of extinct crocodylomorph that lived during the early Eocene.Jouve, S., Iarochene, M., Bouya, B., and Amaghzaz. M. 2005. A new dyrosaurid crocodyliform from the Palaeocene of Morocco and a phylogenetic analysis of Dyrosauridae. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica 50 (3): 581-594. The name Dyrosaurus comes from sauros (sauros) the Greek for lizard or reptile, and Dyr for Djebel Dyr (mountain close to where the type species was discovered.Jouve, Stephane; Larochene, Mohamed; Bouya, Baadi; Amaghzaz, Mbarek. A new species of Dyrosaurus (Crocodylomorpha, Dyrosauridae) from the early Eocene of Morocco: phylogenetic implications. 2005. Published in Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society. pg 603-656. == Species == Although the family Dyrosauridae is quite diverse with many forms of crocodyliforms, the genus Dyrosaurus has only two described species: D. phosphaticus and D. maghribensis. D. phosphaticus was first discovered in Algeria and Tunsinia whereas D. maghribensis has only been found in Morocco. D. maghribensis differs from D. phosphaticus by several synapomorphies, most notably: a smooth dorsal margin of the parietal and widely opened choanae, interfenestral bar wide and strongly T-shaped instead of moderately T-shaped. In D. maghribensis the lateral and medial dorsal osteoderms are not sutured and have no serrated margin. The anterolateral margin of medial row of the dorsal osteoderms have a rounded lateral lobe and the lateral row of dorsal osteoderms are square in shape with rounded corners. In D. phosphaticus there are four longitudinal rows of square osteoderms that are thin and have shallow and wide pits. The osteoderms are square and the anterolateral margin of the medial dorsal osteoderms have an acute rounded process directed laterally. == History of discovery == Jaw and other fragments French paleontologist Auguste Pomel named the genus Dyrosaurus in 1894 for Djebel Dyr, a mountain near Tebessa in Algeria where its fossilized vertebrae were fe crocodyliform remains from Gafsa, Tunisia. Pomel eventually synonymized the type species D. thevestensis with C. phosphaticus to form the new combination D. phosphaticus, making phosphaticus the epithet of the Dyrosaurus type species.Jouve, Stephanie. A new description of the skull of Dyrosaurus phosphaticus (Thomas, 1893) (Mesoeucrocodylia: Dyrosauridae) from the Lower Eocene of North Africa. 2005. Retrieved March 2, 2015 from http://cjes.nrc.ca .Pomel, A. 1894b. Decouverte de champsosauriens dans les gisements de phosphorite du suessonien de l'Algerie. Comptes Rendude l'Academie des Sciences, 118: 1309-1310.Buffetaut E. 1985. L'evolution des crocodiliens. Les animaux disparus-Pour la science, Paris, p. 109Pomel, A. N. 1894. Decouverte de Champsosauriens dans les gisements de phosphorite du suessonien de l'Algerie. Comptes Rendus de l'Academie des Sciences, 118 : 1309-1310. In 1903, the family Dyrosauridae was named by Giuseppe de Stefano referring to the locality for the holotype was found in Djebel Dyr, Algeria.Ashu Khosla, Joseph J. W. Sertich, Guntupalli V. R. Prasad and Omkar Verma Source: Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, Vol. 29, No. 4 (Dec. 12, 2009), pp. 1321-1326 Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd. on behalf of The Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20627142. Accessed: 03-03-2015 07:01 UTCThevenin (1911a, 1911b), with some better preserved material, recognized that Dyrosaurus phosphaticus was a Lower Eocene crocodyliform. Many dyrosaurid remains are known, but unfortunately they are often poorly preserved which makes it difficult for paleontologists to get a strong understanding of the family. ==References== Category:Dyrosaurids Category:Prehistoric reptile genera Category:Prehistoric marine crocodylomorphs Category:Eocene crocodylomorphs Category:Eocene animals of Africa 
