Ernest Fage (born August 15, 1953) is a Canadian politician, who represented the electoral district of Cumberland North in the Nova Scotia House of Assembly from 1997 to 2009. First elected as a Progressive Conservative in a 1997 by-election, Fage served various cabinets as Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, Minister of Economic Development, Minister of Human Resources, Minister of responsible for the Public Service Commission and Minister of Emergency Management. Fage was forced to take a leave of absence from the party caucus in January 2007 after allegations that he had engaged in criminal behaviour following a car accident on November 24, 2006."Premier MacDonald distances himself from Fage", cbc.ca, January 8, 2007. Fage was subsequently charged criminally with leaving the scene of an accident. Witnesses reported that Fage smelled of alcohol at the time of the accident, but he was not charged with an alcohol-related offense due to lack of evidence."Former NS cabinet minister Ernie Fage charged" , CTV News, February 20, 2007. He was found guilty of leaving the scene of an accident, and fined $800, on December 18, 2007, and it was subsequently announced he would not be allowed back into caucus. Prior to the verdict Fage said he planned on running in the next election."N.S. politician guilty of fleeing accident", The Globe and Mail, December 19, 2007 He continued to sit as an independent MLA until the 2009 election, when he was defeated by Brian Skabar -- notably, however, Fage finished in second place ahead of Keith Hunter, his replacement as the Progressive Conservative candidate."Independent Ernie Fage loses re-election bid". CBC News, June 9, 2009. Nine months before the accident, Fage was also involved in a controversy around a government loan to a potato farm with which he had a personal business connection. As a result, he resigned from cabinet."Fage resigns over potato loan", cbc.ca, February 16, 2006. ==References== Category:1953 births Category:Progressive Conservative Association of Nova Scotia MLAs Category:Nova Scotia Independent MLAs Category:Living people Category:People from Cumberland County, Nova Scotia Category:Members of the Executive Council of Nova Scotia Category:21st-century Canadian politicians Category:Farmers from Nova Scotia 
