Francine Faure (6 December 1914 in Oran, Algeria - 24 December 1979) was a French pianist specializing in Bach. Footnote, p. 193: "In fact, Camus's second wife, Francine Faure, was a pianist who specialized in the music of Bach.". and a mathematician.. She was the second wife of Albert Camus, whom she met in 1937 in Algiers. They were married in Lyon on 3 December 1940. She came from a middle-class French family in Oran, Algeria, which was a French colony at the time. She also taught mathematics, sometimes as a supply teacher. ==Personal life== Francine's father Fernand Martial Francois Faure died in World War I, at the Marne, where Camus' father had also died. Her mother, Marie-Fernande Charlotte "Fernande" Faure (nee Albert), was considered by Camus biographer Olivier Todd to be domineering. Her grandfather had built part of the Oran harbor. Her maternal grandmother Clara Albert (nee Touboul) (1868-1940) was a Berber Jew and was born in Oran to Fredj Touboul (also reported as Fredja Abitboul) and Messaouda Touboul (nee Tabet) (1834-1890). Although Camus was indifferent if not hostile to formal marriage, the couple had twins, Catherine and Jean Camus, in Paris in 1945 after the city's liberation. Francine had moved there from Algeria after two years' separation from Albert, who was participating in the French resistance at the time. She was different from Camus' string of petites amies. Her beauty was striking, but her presence was reserved, unassuming, and gentle. And she had a coeur droit, in the words of Camus."Camus, A Romance" by Elizabeth Hawes (2009) - Chapter 2. Francine suffered from and was hospitalized for depression, for which insulin and electroshock therapy were at various times prescribed.. On p. 41, Heims writes: "In 1953, Francine's pain at Camus's indifference and her unreciprocated love became overwhelming. It was expressed in a depression that grew in severity into a full blown illness which included a suicide attempt and severe withdrawal, staring straight ahead and repeating the name Maria Casares. Francine was hospitalized and subject to more than thirty electroshock treatments." At one point she attempted to throw herself from a balcony, whether to escape the hospital or to kill herself is not known. Her depression was blamed in part on her husband's infidelities, and above all on his affair with Maria Casares. Camus told Francine, "They think I'm the guilty one." "Albert Camus: A Life" by Olivier Todd (1996) - Chapter 41. Shortly after being awarded the Nobel Prize, Albert Camus mentioned in a letter to her cousin Nicole Chaperon how he was moved by the generosity of Francine, "whom I have never stopped loving in my bad way." In the same letter he said that Francine had "forgiven" him."Albert Camus: A Life" by Olivier Todd (1996) - Chapter 47. She and Camus are buried together in Lourmarin.Luberon 2012 Dominique Auzias, Dominique Auzias, Jean-Paul Labourdette, Collectif, Jean- Paul Labourdette - 2012 "La tombe de Camus et de son epouse Francine Faure ressemble a deux jardinets piques de romarins, de lavande et d'iris." ==References== Category:1914 births Category:1979 deaths Category:20th-century French mathematicians 
