Heukchi Sangji (Hei Chi Chang Zhi , 630 - 689) was a military general of Baekje, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea. He is remembered primarily as a leader of the Baekje Revival Movement to restore the kingdom after the capital fell in 660 to the Silla-Tang alliance. Later after their defeat he became a general of the Tang dynasty. In China he was known as "Heichi Changzhi".Book of ZhouSamguk Sagi ==Background== In 1929 the tomb of Heukchi Sangji was discovered and excavated in Luoyang, China. According to the Samguk Sagi, he was a man of the West Be (Bu, District) in Baekje who had surrendered to the army of the Tang Dynasty at the fall of Baekje in 660, and became a distinguished Tang general. The epitaph states that his clan was a collateral branch of the Baekje royal family (Buyeo clan, Fu Yu Shi ) but since their ancestors were enfeoffed with the Heuk-chi country (Hei Chi Guo ), their descendants took this name. The epitaph also states that the Heukchi clan leaders held the rank of Dalsol (Da Lu , 2nd court rank). According to the epitaph his great-grandfather was named Mundae (Wen Da ), his grandfather Deokhyeon (De Xian ), and his father was Sacha (Sha Ci ). ==Baekje Revival Movement== In 660 a coalition of about 180,000 men of the Silla-Tang alliance led by Tang's Su Dingfang and Silla's Kim Yu-sin attacked Baekje and took the capital of Sabi. Sangji fled with several other generals to the Gangsan Fortress and joined the Baekje Revival Movement. He and his followers gathered 30,000 men in 10 days. Tang's Su Dingfang seemed to be eager to defeat him and Baekje people. But he won continuously reoccupying 200 or more castles.Samguk Sagi, Scroll 28 In 663, Silla and Tang counterattacked, and besieged the restoration movement at a fortress known as Juryu Castle (juryuseong/Zhou Liu Cheng ).At this point Boksin appears to have betrayed the restoration movement. He had Dochim killed and sought to slay Prince Pung as well. However, Pung killed him first, and fled to Goguryeo. The restoration movement was destroyed shortly thereafter at the Battle of Baekgang. During this battle his follower Yong Sak betrayed him for the Tang but Heukchi Sangji kept marching onward defeating several Chinese armies. He surrendered and the Tang appointed him as the Outer General of the Lieutenant's Army and the Yangju Citizen of the Lieutenant's Army. ==General of Tang== Heukchi Sangji sallied forth for Tang's war against Gokturks. ==Death== But Heukichi and his patron General Zhao felt out of favour from Wu Zetian and the two was sentenced to prison when they were slandered against. Finally, he came to be in chains and sentenced to death in 689. ==Notes== ==See also== *List of monarchs of Korea *Great Eight Families Category:Baekje people Category:Korean generals Category:Tang dynasty generals at war against Tibet Category:630 births Category:689 deaths Category:Tang dynasty generals at war against Baekje 
