{| |} HMS E41 was a British E class submarine built by Cammell Laird, Birkenhead. She was laid down on 26 July 1915 and was commissioned in February 1916. ==Design== Like all post-E8 British E-class submarines, E41 had a displacement of at the surface and while submerged. She had a total length of and a beam length of . She was powered by two Vickers eight-cylinder two- stroke diesel engines and two electric motors.Akerman, P. (1989). Encyclopaedia of British submarines 1901-1955\. 149-150\. Maritime Books. The submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a submerged speed of . British E-class submarines had fuel capacities of of diesel and ranges of when travelling at . E41 was capable of operating submerged for five hours when travelling at . E41 was armed with a 12-pounder QF gun mounted forward of the conning tower. She had five 18 inch (450 mm) torpedo tubes, two in the bow, one either side amidships, and one in the stern; a total of 10 torpedoes were carried. E-Class submarines had wireless systems with power ratings; in some submarines, these were later upgraded to systems by removing a midship torpedo tube. Their maximum design depth was although in service some reached depths of below . Some submarines contained Fessenden oscillator systems. ==Service history== HMS E41 collided with on the surface during exercises off Harwich on 15 August 1916. Sixteen crewmembers were lost, but fifteen escaped including seven from the bottom. Six crewmembers trapped in the submarine as she sank were able to escape by waiting under the conning-tower until the air pressure building up as the submarine sank blew the hatch open and allowed them to float to the surface. Chief Petty Officer William Brown was left behind, but was eventually able to escape from the engine room after an hour and a half in the sunken submarine. HMS E41 was raised in September 1917 and was recommissioned. She was sold in Newcastle on 6 September 1922. ==References== * ==External links== *'Submarine losses 1904 to present day' - Royal Navy Submarine Museum Category:British E-class submarines of the Royal Navy Category:Ships built in Merseyside Category:1915 ships Category:World War I submarines of the United Kingdom Category:Royal Navy ship names Category:Maritime incidents in 1916 Category:Ships sunk in collisions Category:World War I shipwrecks in the North Sea Category:British submarine accidents 
