Insight is an American religious-themed weekly anthology series that aired in syndication from October 1960 to January 1985. Produced by Paulist Productions in Los Angeles, the series presented half-hour dramas illuminating the contemporary search for meaning, freedom, and love. Insight was an anthology series, using an eclectic set of storytelling forms including comedy, melodrama, and fantasy to explore moral dilemmas. The series was created by Roman Catholic priest Ellwood E. "Bud" Kieser, the founder of Paulist Productions. A member of the Paulist Fathers, an evangelistic Catholic order of priests, he worked in the entertainment community in Hollywood as a priest- producer and occasional host, using television as a vehicle of spiritual enrichment. Many of the episodes of the series were videotaped at Television City Studios and then Metromedia Square. It was the longest-running syndicated weekly show until Soul Train took over in 1996, and ran until 2008 (only Entertainment Tonight is longer). It is also the longest-running religious drama program ever. ==Overview== The anthology format and the religious nature of the program attracted a wide variety of actors (including Ed Asner, Jack Albertson, Beau Bridges, Carol Burnett, Michael Burns (six episodes), Ron Howard, Cindy Williams, Patty Duke, Ann Jillian, Wesley Eure, Bob Hastings, Jeffrey Hunter, James Doohan, Ricky Kelman, Jack Klugman, Robert Lansing, Randolph Mantooth, Walter Matthau, Roger Mobley, Deborah Winters, Bob Newhart, Bill Bixby, John Ritter, Bill Mumy, Mark Hamill, Cicely Tyson, Flip Wilson, Keenan Wynn, Marty Feldman, Michael Shea, Louis Gossett Jr., William Shatner, Billy Barty, Nichelle Nichols, Frank Gorshin, Carroll O'Connor, Efrem Zimbalist, Jr., Brian Keith, Alan Oppenheimer, Dick Van Patten, Vera Miles, Beverly Garland, Guy Stockwell, Ricardo Montalban, Juanita Moore, June Lockhart, Elisha Cook Jr., Meg Tilly, Ann Sothern, Michael Learned, Ivan Dixon, William Marshall, Harold Gould, Carl Betz, Joseph Campanella, John Astin, Diane Baker, Greg Morris, Barry Sullivan, Celeste Holm, Barbara Hale, Henry Silva, Robert Culp and Martin Sheen), directors (such as Marc Daniels, Arthur Hiller, Norman Lloyd, Delbert Mann, Ted Post, Jay Sandrich, Ralph Senesky, Hal Cooper, and Jack Shea), and writers (Rod Serling, John T. Dugan, Lan O'Kun, John McGreevey, John Rester Zodrow, Jack Hanrahan, Gilbert Ralston, Harry Julian Fink, and Michael Crichton) to work on the series. In many cases they donated their talents and time. In the United States the series was typically shown on Sunday mornings or late night. Often stations aired Insight in order to meet the Federal Communications Commission's public interest standard for broadcast television. Several episodes are available for purchase from the Paulist Press. ==Awards and nominations== Insight was nominated for the Emmy for Outstanding Achievement in Religious Programming in 1972 and 1973, and won the category every year from 1981 to 1984. ==External links== * * Paulist Productions * "William Shatner wrestles with his soul at 4 AM, and this priest has it on videotape" (Chicago Reader, November 6, 2014) * Insight at CVTA with episode list *https://www.wotape.com/@Insight_2018 Insight - religious TV drama series at Wotape * Insight - TV series at tilda.ws *Insight on Facebook *Insight Powered by Paulist Productions on YouTube Category:1960 American television series debuts Category:1985 American television series endings Category:1960s American drama television series Category:1970s American drama television series Category:1980s American drama television series Category:1960s American anthology television series Category:Christian entertainment television series Category:Black-and-white American television shows Category:English-language television shows Category:First-run syndicated television programs in the United States Category:Television shows about Catholicism Category:1970s American anthology television series Category:1980s American anthology television series es:Insight 
