Jason Wolfe (born November 26, 1977), is an American professional ice hockey player, and goaltender coach. Wolfe began his career at the NCAA level, playing for Merrimack College. Wolfe spent four seasons in Massachusetts, but was used mainly as a backup goaltender, making just 18 appearances in his time there. After completing his final college season in which he played 10 games and posted a .914 save percentage Wolfe was signed by the Reading Royals for the remainder of the 2001/02 term, where he competed effectively allowing just 7 goals on 87 shots in three ECHL games. He moved to sign for the Adirondack IceHawks at the lower UHL level, where for the first time in his career he managed to claim the first team spot. Wolfe also featured in the post-season for the IceHawks. Wolfe's displays for the IceHawks demonstrated to the Roanoke Express that he deserved a chance to start at ECHL level, and they signed him for the start of the 2003/04 season. It was a chance which Wolfe seized, making 37 regular and 2 post-season appearances. Despite his positive showing, Wolfe was to split the following season between three teams - the Mississippi Sea Wolves, the Bakersfield Condors and the Texas Wildcatters. His solid play earned him a prominent role with the Augusta Lynx for the 2005/06 period. The choice of the Lynx proved to be a good one, and Wolfe again claimed the first team slot, putting in a series of impressive displays and using his imposing size to his, and his team's advantage. His impressive form led to the Manchester Phoenix, a team in Britain's EIHL snapping up Wolfe in the summer of 2006 to play as their starting goaltender. Wolfe again played well in the #1 role, appearing in a career high 53 games, and was one of the Phoenix' most reliable players in a season which saw the team play for most of the term without a home rink. Despite his reliability, Wolfe opted not to re- sign the following year, in part because of the birth of his first child, with player/coach Tony Hand opting to sign ex-NHL goaltender Scott Fankhouser as a result. Wolfe took the opportunity to move back to North America where he played the 2007-2008 season for the Oklahoma City Blazers of the CHL and posted a .910 save percentage while appearing in 35 games. Wolfe would remain in the CHL for the 2008/09 term, signing for the New Mexico Scorpions. ==External links== * *Jason Wolfe Personal Profile, Manchester Phoenix Official Website. Category:1977 births Category:Adirondack IceHawks players Category:American men's ice hockey goaltenders Category:Augusta Lynx players Category:Bakersfield Condors (1998-2015) players Category:Living people Category:Manchester Phoenix players Category:Merrimack Warriors men's ice hockey players Category:Mississippi Sea Wolves players Category:Oklahoma City Blazers (1992-present) players Category:People from College Park, Maryland Category:Reading Royals players Category:Roanoke Express players Category:Texas Wildcatters players Category:Ice hockey people from Maryland 
