Jimmy Stofer (born February 10, 1983) is an American singer, bassist, composer, and record producer. ==Life and career== Stofer was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He graduated from the Breck School of Minneapolis in 2001. He currently lives in Los Angeles, CA. His credits include The Fray, Rose Hill Drive, Ryan Bingham, Scars On 45, Weather Maps, Cary Brothers, Meese, Hello Kavita, Van Stee, Dualistics, and more. Stofer was the touring bassist for Denver-based piano rock band The Fray, for three years. The Fray had never had an official bassist, and in 2004, Stofer was employed as their touring bassist. Stofer's talent became evident to The Fray on the local scene. At the time, Stofer was the bassist for the hip hop group Flobots and funk rock band Bop Skizzum, while he was attending the University of Colorado at Boulder The Fray came calling for a bassist. Stofer and The Fray amicably disbanded in 2007, and he focused his attention on his own bands (including Dualistics and The Commentary. He made an appearance in the music video for "Over My Head (Cable Car)" Stofer was a member of Hello Kavita, an indie folk group from Denver, Colorado, and played bass and co-wrote their second album, To A Loved One. In June 2010, Jimmy was also presented as a new member of Rose Hill Drive.Interview with Rose Hill Drive, Colorado Daily, 06/08/2010 In 2011, the band toured as an opener for Stone Temple Pilots for a few months. Stofer was recognized by Bass Player magazine for his contributions to his trade.http://www.bassplayer.com/article/jimmy-stofer/nov-06/23872 He is the singer and main songwriter of the band Weather Maps. The debut album Places was released in late 2010.Bassist Jimmy Stofer takes us "Places" in his solid solo effort http://www.denverpost.com/music/ci_15661388 The second album "Painted Stripes" was released in August 2014. Weather Maps' songs have been featured on ABC's "Revenge," HBO's "Vice," USA's "Necessary Roughness," Lifetime's "Lizzie Borden Chronicles," and MTV's "Unlocking The Truth" and "Teen Mom 2." Stofer composes music for television, film and advertising. His credits include the HBO show 'Vice,' films such as 'A Shot In The Dark,' 'Miracle Fishing,' 'Drunk Bus,' 'Babysplitters,' 'Sunrise/Sunset,' and 'Unfollower,' and advertising clients such as Target, Nike, Toyota, Visa, Google, McDonald's, Coca-Cola, Reebok, Jim Beam, AT&T;, ABC, HBO, USA, Subaru, Wendy's, Dairy Queen, and Funny or Die. ==References== == External links == Category:American bass guitarists Category:Living people Category:1983 births Category:American session musicians Category:American folk rock musicians Category:21st-century American bass guitarists 
