John Noel Dowland, GC (6 November 1914 - 13 January 1942) was a Royal Air Force officer of the Second World War and a recipient of the George Cross.Obituary in The Times, 17 January 1942, p.2 ==Life== Dowland was the son of the vicar of Ruscombe, the Rev. F.M. Dowland, and educated at St John's School, Leatherhead before taking him flight training at Cranwell in 1934. After Cranwell he was a gazetted as a pilot officer and joined a squadron of Bomber Command. At the outbreak of World War II he took command of a unit overseas. Dowland was a Royal Air Force officer of the Second World War and a recipient of the George Cross. Along with civilian armament instructor Leonard Henry Harrison, Dowland was awarded the George Cross for his gallantry in defusing a bomb that had fallen on the grain ship SS Kildare in Immingham docks on 11 February 1940. The bomb proved extremely difficult to defuse as it had embedded itself at an extreme angle in the main deck. The citation, which appeared in the London Gazette on 7 January 1941, noted that he displayed the same "conspicuous courage and devotion to duty in circumstances of exceptional danger and difficulty" when defusing a bomb on a trawler in June 1940.London Gazette, 7 January 1941 His and Harrison's actions were the earliest to be awarded the George Cross, although Thomas Alderson's award was the first to be announced. Dowland later achieved the rank of wing commander, but was killed when taking part in a raid on Pantelleria on 13 January 1942. After the aircraft he was piloting was damaged by anti-aircraft fire, Dowland attempted an emergency landing at Luqa, Malta. Both he and his observer were killed in the subsequent crash. Dowland is buried in Capuccini Naval Cemetery, Malta. ==References== Category:1914 births Category:1942 deaths Category:British recipients of the George Cross Category:Royal Air Force recipients of the George Cross Category:Royal Air Force wing commanders Category:Royal Air Force personnel of World War II Category:British military personnel killed in World War II Category:Bomb disposal personnel Category:People educated at St John's School, Leatherhead 
