Sir Josias Cunningham, DL (20 January 1934Britannica - 9 August 2000) was a Northern Irish stock broker, farmer and politician. ==Early life== Josias Cunningham, known as "Joe", the grandson of Samuel Cunningham, was born into a family of stock brokers, the family firm being Cunningham Coates. The family also owned The Northern Whig newspaper. He was educated at Fettes College, Edinburgh, where his uncles James Glencairn Cunningham and Dunlop McCosh Cunningham had attended, . He then went on to read biological sciences at Clare College, Cambridge, where his uncle and politician Knox Cunningham had also attended.BBC report on deathElectric-Review Fernhill House History ==Career and politics== As well as working in the family firm he farmed of County Antrim. In 1991 on the death of Sir George Clarke he was elected President of the Ulster Unionist Council and was one of the last remainders of Northern Ireland's moneyed families to remain involved in politics in the most recent instalment of The Troubles.New York Times obit He was a member of the Orange OrderThe Independent Obituary and lived on his farm at Templepatrick, County Antrim. The Cunningham family still remain active in the Parkgate and Templepatrick area with his son and widow continuing to live on the family estate. ==Death== Sir Josias Cunningham died in a car accident at Carryduff, County Down in 2000, aged 66. His funeral took place in Donegore Presbyterian Church. He was married and had four children. The UUP headquarters, Cunningham House, was named in his family's honour, and was dedicated by his widow.The Sunday Life ==References== Category:1934 births Category:2000 deaths Category:People from County Antrim Category:British stockbrokers Category:Deputy Lieutenants of Antrim Category:Knights Bachelor Category:Ulster Unionist Party politicians Category:Businesspeople from Northern Ireland Category:Presbyterians from Northern Ireland Category:People educated at Fettes College Category:Road incident deaths in Northern Ireland 
