Kelly Lange (born Dorothy Scafard; December 14, 1937) is an American journalist, most notable for being the first woman to be a nightly news anchor in Los Angeles. Lange, a Shakespeare major in college, is a longtime news anchor in Los Angeles, a veteran radio and TV news reporter, NBC talk show host, former Tournament of Roses parade co-host, and a best-selling mystery author. ==Early career== Lange was born Dorothy Scafard in New York City"Entry: Dorothy Scafard", 1940 United States Census and graduated from Merrimack College in North Andover, Massachusetts."About: Kelly Lange", kelly- lange.com website (archived 2002)Weinstein, Steve, "Wonder What She Does After the Late News? : Books: Mystery fan Kelly Lange's been going home to her computer. Her first novel, 'Trophy Wife,' set in L.A.'s garment industry, has just been published by Simon & Schuster.", Los Angeles Times, June 17, 1995 She moved to California in the mid-1960s to pursue a certification to be a school teacher. One day in 1967, Lange, a model at the time, got into a line at a Buena Park, California shopping mall, because it appeared "they were giving something away." The something they were giving away turned out to be applications for two positions as "Ladybirds" on KABC radio. The lucky duo would become the first female traffic/weather reporters in this area to patrol in helicopters. Lange was one of two chosen. She got the 6 a.m.-to-9 a.m. segment and she was called "Dawn O'Day." Another applicant, a film studio secretary named Lori Ross, got the afternoon shift as "Eve O'Day." "The two women in their tight-fitting, silver-lame jumpsuits paved the way for today's less-exploited women deejays and announcers," thus began Lange's career as a news reporter, spotting news and reporting traffic for KABC, later joining KNBC in 1971. NBC News refers to Lange as the first woman to anchor a nightly newscast at an NBC-owned station. TV Guide said Lange was the first local newscaster to be paid $1 million per year. ==Career== Lange started in March of 1971 as a weather forecaster for KNBC's weeknight newscasts, and later appeared on Sunday, a weekly features program on the station which she co- hosted with Tom Snyder, Paul Moyer and Ralph Story. In December of 1976 Lange was promoted to news anchor, and co-anchored KNBC's various weeknight news programs through December 1998 alongside Moyer, Jess Marlow, John Schubeck, Jack Perkins, John Beard, Keith Morrison, and Chuck Henry. Lange also co- hosted NBC's network coverage of the Tournament of Roses Parade alongside Michael Landon; was the regular guest host of Tomorrow, with former KNBC colleague Tom Snyder; and a regular guest host of the Today show. She hosted the Grand Floral Parade of the Portland Rose Festival and won several Emmy Awards as well as serving as host of the primetime network broadcast ceremony. Lange began writing fiction and mysteries while still a news anchor, partially to relieve insomnia from working on the 11 pm newscast. After a two-year talk show stint with KCBS-TV (Women 2 Women alongside newscaster Ann Martin), she left broadcasting and has since been a full-time mystery novelist. The popular mystery fiction books include The Reporter, Dead File, and Graveyard Shift, featuring fictional TV news anchor Maxi Poole, plus Trophy Wife and Gossip. In 2010, Lange was presented with the Golden Mike's Lifetime Achievement Award by the Radio and Television News Association of Southern California. ==Personal life== She was married to film director William Friedkin (1987-1990). She has one daughter, Kelly Snyder, and three grandchildren. ==References== ==External links== * * Author's website (archived 2002) Category:1937 births Category:American television news anchors Category:Living people 
