Norwegian actor, singer, translator, screenwriter, comedian and occasional director, Knut Lystad Knut Ove Lystad (born 31 January 1946) is a Norwegian actor, singer, translator, screenwriter, comedian and occasional director, best known from the comedy trio KLM, alongside Trond Kirkvaag and Lars Mjoen. ==Career== Lystad and Mjoen began their entertainment careers with the NRK radio show "Bedre sent enn alvor" (Better late than seriously) in 1975, a program heavily inspired by Monty Python. In 1976, they moved on to television where they joined Kirkvaag, who was already a well-known comedian in Norway, for the satirical news program Nynytt (Newnews). His future KLM shows included "Klin Kokos" (Sticky Coconuts, 1981), "MRK Fjaersynet" (MRK TeeVee,This mocks NRK's title, with the acronym being an abbreviation of "Morsk Rikskringkasting" (Hard and Fast National Broadcasting Corporation). Fjaersyn is a colloquial pronunciation of "fjernsyn" (TV). 1983), "I spokelyset" (In the Joke Light, 1984), "Skai TV - imitert fjernsyn" (Skai R TV Not to be confused with the Greek Skai TV (SKAI Teleorase) channel, set up five years later... -- An Imitated Television (Channel), 1988), "KLMs Nachspiel" (KLM's After Play, 1992) and "KLMs Vorspiel" (KLM's Prelude, 1995). In 1985, KLM made their first and only feature film, Noe helt annet (Something completely different), about Buffalo Bull, a young man who must come to terms about being a vampire. KLM made four series of Brodrene Dal, about three explorer brothers (Gaus (Mjoen), Roms (Lystad) and Brumund Dal (Kirkvaag)) and their absurd adventures. In 1998, Lystad was cast in the TV2 sitcom "Karl & co", which ran until 2001. In 2007 he starred in another sitcom on NRK, "Luftens helter" (Heroes of the Sky), which he co-created with his KLM colleague Trond Kirkvaag. ==Notes== ==See also== *Trond Kirkvaag, member of the KLM trio *Lars Mjoen, member of the KLM trio ==External links== * Category:1946 births Category:Living people Category:Norwegian comedians Category:Norwegian male television actors Category:Leonard Statuette winners 
