Lacken is a rural agricultural area about two miles outside the town of New Ross in Co. Wexford, Ireland. Central to the area is Lacken Hill, a hill planted with a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees which has a public walk- way up through the wood. It is a popular area for walkers and cyclists as there are numerous paths and tracks in the wood. == Location == Lacken is located in the parish of Cushinstown, one of the largest parishes in County Wexford, Ireland. The closest urban centre to Lacken is New Ross, which is approximately two miles away. The towns of Enniscorthy, Wexford and Waterford are all approximately thirty minutes drive from Lacken. Due to its convenience to several urban centres there are increasing numbers of commuters living in the area. == History == During the Irish Rebellion of 1798, rebels were in complete control of County Wexford for the three weeks between 30 May and 21 June. These leaders were a mixture of Catholic and Anglican farmers, merchants and professional men, but also included several Catholic priests, most of whom appear to have been renegades in the eyes of their bishop even before joining the rebels.Multitext Project in History: The 1798 Rebellion in Wexford The military effort was conducted with the help of an informal conscription of able-bodied men and order was preserved in towns by volunteer tradesmen and in the countryside by small crossroads guarding parties. Lacken Hill was used as a camp for the rebels in the aftermath of one of the most bloody battles of the entire rebellion, the Battle of New Ross. It is estimated that perhaps as many as two thousand rebels were killed. The rebels camped on Lacken Hill from 11 June. Their numbers dwindled greatly during this time down to approximately 400 by 19 June, when Father Philip Roche led the remaining able-bodied insurgents in a retreat to the Three Rocks near Wexford town to avoid British troops.Ireland Online: 1798 - Calendar of Events Today there is a Holy Cross and commemorative stone at the top of the hill, with a plaque commemorating the actions of the rebels who fought in the uprising, died on Lacken Hill and were buried in unmarked graves there. == Forest of the Dunbrody == Coillte, Ireland's state forestry body, planted 25,000 trees of the species used to build the Dunbrody Replica Famine Ship on Lacken Hill. Individuals could sponsor the planting of such trees.Dunbrody - Sponsor a Tree The forest on Lacken Hill is quite individual due to its mixture of deciduous and coniferous trees and is rich in native flora and fauna. There is a popular walkway through the forest, taking in the historic Lacken Hill summit, and linking the Forest of the Dunbrody with the Dunbrody Famine Ship in nearby New Ross town.Wexford Walking Trails - Lacken Hill == Local economy == Lacken is primarily an agricultural area, with mixed farming being predominant. There are, however, some quite successful businesses in the area, with many of them making use of the area's natural beauty and agricultural nature as an integral part of, or as a backdrop to, their business. == Religion == The area is predominantly Catholic, and the nearest place of religious worship is Cushinstown Catholic Church. ==References== Category:Wexford, County Wexford 
