The bridge, not long after completion. Long Bien Bridge in 2010. The constructor panel of Dayde & Pille, Paris. Long Bien Bridge (; ) is a historic cantilever bridge across the Red River that connects two districts, Hoan Kiem and Long Bien of the city of Hanoi, Vietnam. It was originally called Paul Doumer Bridge. == History == The bridge was built in 1899-1902 by the architects Dayde & Pille of Paris, and opened in 1903.Long Bien: Historic Hanoi bridge with an uncertain future by Petroc Trelawny, BBC News Magazine, 18 August 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2013. Before North Vietnam's independence in 1954, it was called Paul-Doumer Bridge, named after Paul Doumer - The Governor-General of French Indochina and then French president. At in length, it was, at that time, one of the longest bridges in Asia. For the French colonial government, the construction was of strategic importance in securing control of northern Vietnam. From 1899 to 1902, more than 3,000 Vietnamese took part in the construction. It was heavily bombarded during Vietnam War due to its critical position (the only bridge at that time across the Red River connecting Hanoi to the main port of Haiphong). The first attack took place in 1967, and the center span of the bridge was felled by an attack by 20 USAF F-105 fighter-bombers on 11 August.Sources: 388th TFW official history & Rolling Thunder Digest (CINCPAC) Edition Five, Jul-Sep 1967 CIA reports noted that the severing of the bridge did not appear to have caused as much disruption as had been expected. The defence of Long Bien Bridge continues to play a large role in Hanoi's self-image and is often extolled in poetry and song. It was rendered unusable for a year when, in May 1972, it fell victim to one of the first co-ordinated attacks using laser-guided "smart bombs". Some parts of the original structure remain intact, while large sections have been built later to repair the holes. Only half of the bridge retains its original shape. A project with support and loan from the French government is currently in progress to restore the bridge to its original appearance. Today trains, mopeds, bicycles and pedestrians use the dilapidated bridge, while all other traffic is diverted to the nearby Chuong Duong Bridge and some newly built bridges: Thanh Tri Bridge, Thang Long Bridge, Vinh Tuy Bridge, and Nhat Tan Bridge. Under the bridge, poor families live in boats on the Red River, coming from many rural areas of Vietnam. == Image gallery == File:Cau Long Bien.jpg|The pedestrian and two-wheeled vehicles pathway File:Long Bien Bridge 3796900232 1922457f90.jpg|The bridge's iron beams Image:Long_bien_bridge.jpg|Long Bien Bridge as seen from the Red River Image:Long Bien Bridge Sunset.jpg|Sunset over the Red River from the bridge == References == Category:Red River (Asia) Category:Bridges in Hanoi Category:Bridges completed in 1903 Category:Cantilever bridges Category:Railway bridges in Vietnam Category:Steel bridges 
