Louis Michel was a French mathematical physicist at the Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques (IHES). He was born in Roanne, in the Loire department in central France, on 4 May 1923, and died in Bures-sur-Yvette (Essonne), in the Ile-de-France region, on 30 December 1999. ==Biography== Michel completed his studies at the Ecole Polytechnique in Paris. After World War II, he went to Manchester, England, where he worked on weak interactions. Back in France, he was teaching in Lille and Orsay before creating the Centre de Physique Theorique of the Ecole Polytechnique (CPHT) in Palaiseau. In 1962, he became a permanent professor at Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques (IHES) in Bures-sur-Yvette, where he remained until his retirement, and as an emeritus professor until his death. Louis Michel was President of the Societe Francaise de Physique between 1978 and 1980, and a member of the French Academy of Sciences since 1979. In 1982, he was awarded the Wigner Medal. His scientific activities in the domain of theoretical physics encompassed many fields, from elementary particles and High Energy Physics to Crystals, and provided pioneering insights in spontaneous symmetry breaking in many contexts. His name is associated with Michel parameters describing the phase space distribution of leptonic decays of charged leptons, the Bargmann-Michel-Telegdi equation describing spin evolution in a magnetic field, the theory of phase transitions as a symmetry-breaking, the Michel-Radicati theory for the SU(3) octet, and more generally his geometric theory of spontaneous symmetry breaking, and to several results in crystallography. In 2000, in honor of his memory, the IHES created the chaire Louis Michel de physique theorique, an academic chair for distinguished long- term visitors. ==References== ==Further reading== * Category:Members of the French Academy of Sciences Category:1923 births Category:1999 deaths Category:People from Roanne Category:French physicists Category:Institute for Advanced Study visiting scholars Category:Mathematical physicists Category:20th-century mathematicians 
