Marc John Collins-Rector (born October 16, 1959) is an American businessman and a convicted sex offender, known for founding Digital Entertainment Network, an online streaming video broadcaster and notable dot-com failure, as well as his associations with Hollywood and media figures. His child sexual abuse conviction is highlighted in the 2014 documentary An Open Secret. == Early life == Born Mark John Collins, he changed his name to Marc Collins- Rector in 1998. In the early 1980s Rector founded Telequest, a Florida-based telecommunications company. In 1984, he founded World TravelNet, a company which electronically coordinated cruises and tours; its affiliate, World ComNet, was floated on the Vancouver Stock Exchange in 1987. Its valuation briefly peaked at $100 million before increasing competition led to bankruptcy. Rector later founded an early ISP; Concentric Network, in 1991 along with partner Chad Shackley. == DEN founding == Rector and Shackley sold Concentric in 1995 and, using money raised from the sale, as well as close to $100million of investor and venture capital, formed an early Internet video media content delivery company, Digital Entertainment Network. Collins-Rector was the co-founder and chairman of DEN, which exhausted its funding following a failed IPO bid and collapsed amidst allegations of Collins-Rector having sexually abused boys, coercing them with drugs and guns. == Child enticement conviction == Brock Pierce Running DEN out of a Los Angeles mansion, Collins- Rector and his business partners--Chad Shackley and Brock Pierce--hosted lavish parties, attended by Hollywood's gay A-list. It was at those parties Collins- Rector and others allegedly sexually assaulted teenage boys. In August 2000, a New Jersey federal grand jury indicted Collins-Rector on criminal charges that he had transported minors across state lines for the purpose of having sex with them. After his indictment Collins-Rector fled to Spain together with Shackley and Pierce. Interpol arrested them in May 2002 in a villa in the south Spanish beach city of Marbella. Guns, machetes and child pornography were found in the house. Collins-Rector fought extradition proceedings for two years before returning to the United States, where he pleaded guilty to eight charges of child enticement and registered as a sex offender. He admitted luring five minors across state lines for sexual purposes. He received credit for time that he had served in a Spanish jail and was registered as a sex offender under a weekly supervision. In 2006, a U.S. District Court granted Collins-Rector special permission to go to the United Kingdom to receive treatment for a brain tumor. He subsequently renounced his US citizenship and has never returned to the United States.An Open Secret, 2014; Amy Berg. In 2007, he was photographed in London, and in 2008 was living in the Dominican Republic. , he lives in a "European port city" and uses the names "Mark Collins" and "Morgan Von Phoenix". == Later career == News reports have stated that Collins-Rector was a silent partner in the MMORPG service company IGE, which was founded by ex-DEN VP Brock Pierce - who is now chairman of the Bitcoin Foundation. IGE initially used an address in the city of Marbella, Spain, where Collins-Rector, Shackley and Pierce shared a villa until it was raided by Interpol in 2002. ==References== Category:1959 births Category:Living people Category:American media executives Category:American sex offenders Category:Businesspeople in telecommunications Category:Businesspeople from Florida Category:Place of birth missing (living people) Category:People extradited from Spain Category:People extradited to the United States Category:LGBT businesspeople from the United States Category:Violence against men in North America 
