Mario Maskareli () (20 October 1918 in Cetinje - 26 August 1996 in Risan), was a painter from modern-day Montenegro. ==Biography== Maskareli graduated from the Academy of Fine Arts in Belgrade, Department of Painting in 1951, with Professor Nedeljko Gvozdenovic. In 1951 he attended a specialized course in graphic art with Professor Bosko Karanovic. He spent the academic year 1950/51 teaching at the Applied Arts School in Herceg-Novi. He was the member of the following groups: Samostalni (The Independent), Beogradska grupa (Belgrade Group) and Lada. He went on study tours to Greece, Italy, France, Belgium and Netherlands. He exhibited for the first time in 1948. During his artistic career, he was engaged in painting, and graphic art, illustration, scenography, interior design and organization of cultural events. He won several prizes and awards, among which are the Prize for Painting at the 5th October Salon in Belgrade (1961), the Golden Pen of Belgrade for the illustration of poetry (1973) and the First Prize for Painting at the 14th Winter Salon at Herceg-Novi (1981). His works can be found in the Museum of Contemporary Art in Belgrade, The Gallery of Fine Arts - Gift Collection of Rajko Mamuzic in Novi Sad, the National Museum of Montenegro at Cetinje and other collections both at home and abroad. He lived and worked in Belgrade and Prcanj. Painter is his paternal half-brother. His niece is the Opera singer Vera Cirkovic. ==External links== * Art Gallery Gift Collection of Rajko Mamuzic, Novi Sad * === Further reading=== # Miodrag Pavlovic, Mario i ekspresionisti. Uz slikarsku biografiju Marija Maskarelija (Mario and the Expressionists. A Contribution to the Artistic Biography of Mario Maskareli), Letopis Matice srpske 157, 427, 6, Novi Sad, Jun 1981, 981-920. # Petar Petrovic, "A Word about the Drawings of Mario Maskareli", in: Mario Maskareli. Crtezi (Mario Maskareli. Drawings), KC ,,Jadran Art", Perast, 2004, [9]-[10]. # Lidija Merenik, Ljiljana Cinkul, Draginja Maskareli, Mario Maskareli. Mala retrospektiva: grafike i crtezi/Mario Maskareli. A Small Retrospective: Prints and Drawings, Galerija Graficki kolektiv, Beograd, 2005. # Mario Maskareli. Grafike (Mario Maskareli. Engravings), Galerija likovne umetnosti Poklon zbirka Rajka Mamuzica, Novi Sad, 2007. Category:Serbian painters Category:Montenegrin artists Category:Montenegrin painters Category:Montenegrin people of Italian descent Category:People from Cetinje Category:1918 births Category:1996 deaths Category:Yugoslav painters Category:Yugoslav people of Italian descent 
