Dame Mary Lesley Perkins, (born 14 February 1944) is an English billionaire who is the co-founder of Specsavers, the British retail opticians chain. Together with her husband, co-founder and chairman Doug Perkins, Dame Mary has three children, all of whom work for Specsavers, and are eventually expected to take over the privately owned company. ==Early life== She attended Fairfield Grammar School in Bristol. She then went to Cardiff University to train as an optometrist. At Cardiff, she met Doug Perkins, whom she would later marry. The couple established their first business in Bristol in the 1960s. This was a chain of opticians around Bristol, which they sold for PS2 million in 1980, and continue to receive income from. After the sale the couple moved to Guernsey, where Mary's father had retired. ==Specsavers== Mary and Doug Perkins established Specsavers in Guernsey in 1984. In 2007 it was the largest privately owned opticians in the world, with nearly 900 stores across the UK and Europe. By 2011 the company had an annual turnover of PS1.5bn and over 30,000 staff in markets in the UK, Europe and Australasia.Growing Business Entrepreneur Profiles - Specsavers' Dame Mary Perkins 25 May 2012 Her current title at Specsavers is "founder". Dame Mary sits on the company board, oversees business development and has particular responsibility for running PR. She has admitted donning disguises and visiting Specsavers stores, posing as a customer. ==Awards and honours== Perkins was made an honorary fellow of Cardiff University in 2005. The same year she received the Rotary International Community and Vocational Service Award for her services to charity and in 2006 won the inaugural Spirit of everywoman Award. Perkins was the first female optician in the UK to receive the title of Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in 2007. The accolade was also in recognition of her other charitable work, including the Guernsey annual "Specsavers Liberation Tea Dance for pensioners", and her directorship of Women's Refuge and Age Concern. She is also a patron to leading children's charity Kidscape.Kidscape website In 2012 Dame Mary Perkins was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Business from Plymouth University In February 2013 she was assessed as one of the 100 most powerful women in the United Kingdom by Woman's Hour on BBC Radio 4.BBC Radio 4, Woman's Hour Power list In July 2015 she was made an Officer Sister of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem.London Gazette In October 2017, Dame Mary was honoured with an EY Entrepreneur Of The Year UK Lifetime Achievement Award for her continued contribution to entrepreneurship and the economy. http://www.ey.com/uk/en/about-us/entrepreneurship/entrepreneur-of-the-year ==Other== Perkins is a founding patron of the not-for-profit social enterprise, Modern Muse. ==References== Category:1944 births Category:Dames Commander of the Order of the British Empire Category:English billionaires Category:English businesspeople Category:Living people Category:People educated at Fairfield Grammar School Category:Alumni of Cardiff University Category:People from Bristol Category:Guernsey women 
