Maurice Alfredo Sixto (May 23, 1919, Gonaives, Haiti - May 12, 1984, Philadelphia, USA) was a pioneer of a Haitian oral literary genre known as Lodyans, and distributed his works widely through the audio technology of his time, including LP's and cassettes . To this day Sixto remains the best known author in the genre. He was also a professor, ambassador, translator, and tour guide. The son of an engineer, Maurice Alfredo Sixto and Maria Bourand, he attended St Louis de Gonzague in Port-au-Prince for his secondary studies. Upon graduation he attended l'Academie Militaire where he remained for only three months. He eventually studied law at the Faculte de Droit from 1945-1948 while working for Radio HHBM (now MBC). Sixto is remembered in Haitian culture for his contributions to oral literature. His ability to use rich, descriptive, and iconic Haitian Creole idioms and expressions create a narrative that displays the true face of Haitian culture. Sixto prefaces every story with Regards sur choses et gens entendu (Regarding Things Seen and People Heard). In 2018, Sixto, his work and legacy were the subject of an academic colloquium in Port-au-Prince. Sixto's influences in the Lodyans genre include Justin Lherisson while his successors include Charlot Lucien. ==Published work== * Volume I: Lea Kokoye; Madan Rorol * Volume II: Zabelbok Berachat; Bos Chaleran * Volume III: Ti Sentaniz; Madan Senvilus; Lok Tama; Pe Tanmba * Volume IV: Gwo Moso; Ti Kam; Tant Mezi; Ronma lan ekspo; Priye devan katedral * Volume V: J'ai venge la race; Depestre; Le corallin du Celibataire; Les ambassadeurs a Kinshasa * Volume VI: Madan Jul; Ton chal; L'homme citron; Men yon lot lang; Pleyonas; Teofil; Le jeune agronome; General Ti Kok; La petite veste de galerie de Papa * Leya Kokoye ak lot lodyans, Presses Nationales D'Haiti, 2005. Today, the Foyer Maurice Sixto, honors his work and social commentary found in Ti Sentanize, where Sixto derides his fellow bourgeosie countrymen for their abuse and forced labor of domestic children servants also referred to as Restavecs. ==References== == External links == *Fondation Maurice Sixto *Haiti's hidden 'child slaves', BBC News *At a glance: Haiti, Unicef Category:1919 births Category:1984 deaths Category:Haitian male short story writers Category:Haitian short story writers Category:Haitian male novelists Category:Tour guides Category:20th-century Haitian novelists Category:20th-century male writers 
