Mertol Demirelli, (born June 6, 1996 in Ankara) is a Turkish child prodigy pianist. For up-to-date information; mertoldemirelli.com ==Education== He began his music studies when he was four years old, private piano lessons followed when he was five. Displaying noticeable talent at the special admittance examinations, Mertol was accepted to the Bilkent University, Faculty of Music and Performing Arts, Music Preparatory Primary School with full scholarship. He studied piano with Oya Unler for four years and with Ersin Onay for a year. Mertol also continued his high school education and followed a special program for talented children at this school by taking courses on Music Theory, Ear Training, with Dr. Orhun Orhon, Composition with Dr. Turgut Pogun, Dr. Orhun Orhon and Dr. Onur Turkmen and Violin with Eda Ozer. He was accepted to the Queen Elisabeth Music Chapel(Belgium) in October 2010 with full scholarship and studied piano with Abdel Rahman El Bacha for four years. After October 2014, he studies piano under the direction of Maria- Joao Pires who invites him to the Partitura Project to share the stage on regular occasions the following year. ==Performances== At the age of seven in 2003, he won the IBLA Grand Prize Italy. The price included organization of concerts worldwide. In January 2004, Mertol gave concerts at Newcastle (England) in February 2004, at New York including Carnegie Hall and Arkansas- Little Rock (USA). Since 2003, he gave concerts at various universities including, Anadolu, Bilkent, Bogazici, Hacettepe, Istanbul, Izzet Baysal and Yildiz. Demirelli performed at the Akbank Piano Days, The Mersin International Music Festival, Antalya International Piano Festival as well as special concerts at Turkish National Grand Assembly, Turkish Pediatric Foundation and Vehbi Koc Foundation. He also performed with The Spivakov Genius Children from Russia at Bogazici University in 2007. He attended Gulsin Onay, Muhittin Demiriz, Idil Biret, Edna Golandsky, Dmitri Bashkirov, Jean-Claude Vanden Eynden and Oya Unler' s master-classes. He also performed with Fazil Say at his Ayvalik and Antalya International Piano Festival concerts. He performed W.A. Mozart's Concerto for Piano No.11 when he was eight. At nine, the Piano Concerto No.12, at eleven, the Piano Concerto No.23. When he was ten in 2007, at the opening of 35th International Istanbul Music Festival, he played the J.S. Bach Concerto for Two Pianos, in C minor with Idil Biret at Hagia Eirene Museum. At twelve, he played Mozart Concerto For Two Pianos with Huseyin Sermet at Istanbul and Beethoven Triple Concerto at Munich. At fourteen, he played at the Belgium premiere of Mozart' s Violin and Piano Concerto, KV Anh. 56 (315f) in March 2011 at Brussels at Flagey. In September-October 2011, He played Liszt Piano Concerto No. 1 with Cem Mansur and the Youth Philharmonic Orchestra of Turkey at Istanbul and Munich. He has been granted a prize "Young artist of the year, in Germany" during Munich concert. He played Mendelssohn's Concerto for Violin and Piano (Op.17) with Jean-Claude Casadesus and The Sinfonia Varshovia at the opening concert of Queen Elisabeth Musical Voyage 2011 in Istanbul. He played Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto No.1 in October 2013, at the opening of concert season in Istanbul. In 2004, he played at the special vocations which Prof. Dr. Ihsan Dogramaci gave to President of Azerbaijan; Ilham Aliyev, in 2005 the IMF Vice President; Ann Krueger and in 2007 President of Israel; Shimon Peres. In 2005 with the invitation of The Turkish Foreign Ministry he gave concerts in Jordan, in 2008 Lithuania and Switzerland in Geneva at Palais des Nations of UN. He played at the Spivakov Music Festival at Moskow in 2008 and at the Summer of Culture Festival at Bratislava in 2009. He played at Belgium Royal Palace in November 2010. He performed at Vexin Festival in 2012. Mertol Demirelli has given concerts with orchestras including the Bilkent Symphony Orchestra, Antalya, Bursa, Cukurova, Istanbul State Symphony Orchestras, The Borusan Istanbul Philharmonic, CRR, Eskisehir Municipality, Dogus Children' s, Kaunas Symphony, The Royal Chamber Orchestra of Wallonia Orchestras and Presidential Symphony Orchestra. The conductors he collaborated with are Augustin Dumay, Burak Tuzun, Ender Sakpinar, Gurer Aykal, Isin Metin, Ibrahim Yazici, Kevin Griffiths, Modestas Pitrenas, Oguzhan Kavruk and Rengim Gokmen. ==External links== * Mertol Demirelli-Official web page * Mertol Demirelli-Queen Elisabeth Music Chapel official web page * Mertol Demirelli-IBLA Foundation official web page Carnegie Hall Concert, when he was 7 yo, small child in the middle wearing red shirt * Mertol Demirelli-IKSV official web page Hagia Eirene Museum performance at 35th Istanbul Music Festival Anniversary Opening Concert Category:1996 births Category:Living people Category:Turkish pianists Category:21st-century pianists 
