The Molloy Deep (also known as the Molloy Hole) is a bathymetric feature in the Fram Strait, within the Greenland Sea east of Greenland and about 160 km west of Svalbard. It is the location of the deepest point in the Arctic Ocean.IHO-IOC GEBCO Gazetteer of Undersea Feature Names (2018-06-25), available online at http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/gazetteer/ The outer rim of the trench is at a depth of and contains about 600 km2 inside the rim, descending to approximately at its greatest depth. The basin floor measures about 220 km2, and is the deepest point in the Arctic Ocean. The first and only person to have reached the bottom of the Molloy Deep is American explorer Victor Vescovo, as part of his Five Deeps Expedition. ==Geology== The Molloy Deep is a roughly rectangular, seismically active,Laderach, C., et al. (2011). Seismicity and active tectonic processes in the ultra-slow spreading Lena Trough, Arctic Ocean. Geophysical Journal International, v.184, pp. 1354-1370. doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.2010.04926 extensional, sea-floor basin, that lies between the northwestern tip of the Molloy Fracture Zone, (a right-lateral, strike-slip fault), and the Spitsbergen Fracture Zone (also a right-lateral, strike-slip fault). These two fracture zones connect the Knipovich Ridge (the actively spreading northern segment of the Mid-Atlantic Ocean ridge system), with the Lena Trough, an actively spreading mid-ocean ridge region north of the Spitsbergen Fracture Zone. The Lena Trough joins the southwestern end of the Arctic Ocean's Gakkel Ridgehttps://www.thoughtco.com/fault-types-with- diagrams-3879102 which is the slowest spreading mid-ocean ridge on Earth, and which stretches across the entire Arctic Oceans' Eurasian Basin.Gakkel Ridge ==History== DSSV Pressure Drop and DSV Limiting Factor at its stern The Molloy Deep was discovered in September 1972 by the USNS Hayes (T-AGOR 16), the first of a new class of catamaran-hulled oceanographic research vessels. The Molloy Deep, Molloy Hole, Molloy Fracture Zone, and Molloy Ridge were named after Arthur E. Molloy, a U.S. Navy research scientist who worked in the North Atlantic, North Pacific and Arctic Oceans in the 1950s-1970s.Burton G. Hurdle (ed.), The Nordic Seas: Springer-Verlag, 1986; pp.227-28. === Manned descent === The first, and so far only, person to reach the bottom of the Molloy Deep is Victor Vescovo on 24 August 2019. The Five Deeps Expedition leader and chief submersible pilot, Vescovo, descended into the Malloy Deep in the Deep- Submergence Vehicle DSV Limiting Factor (a Triton 36000/2 model submersible) from the support ship, the Deep Submersible Support Vessel DSSV Pressure Drop. The Five Deeps Expedition established the depth of the Molloy Deep as +- by direct CTD pressure measurements. This is shallower than previous estimations using earlier technology with less precise bathymetric methods. ==References== Category:Geography of the Arctic Category:Oceanic basins of the Arctic Ocean Category:Abyssal plains Category:Extreme points of Earth 
