MouthShut.com is an India-based user-generated content and consumer review platform on the Internet. On April 29, 2013, filed a petition in the Supreme Court of India to nullify India's Information Technology Rules 2011 Mouthshut.com v. Union of India . The verdict was in favor of the petitioners. MouthShut.com's work has been mentioned in the Wall Street Journal, Entrepreneur Magazine, and London's Financial Times. MouthShut.com's founder and CEO Faisal Farooqui has been named among the Top Contemporary Entrepreneurs in India. == History == MouthShut.com was founded in 2000 in Mumbai (Bombay), India by Faisal Farooqui. The website hosts reviews of gadgets, restaurants, movies, FMCG goods, travel destinations, banks , and the like. In 2008, the firm announced the MouthShut Mobile Service, by which users can send SMS-based reviews; it discontinued this feature in 2013 after launching its mobile app. ==Impact== The firm claims that its platform has enabled more than 375 Million smart shopping decisions, thereby helping users chose the right products and services. According to The Times of India, it is the leader in the user-generated content space in India. The Asian Age newspaper stated that most Indians online are referring to MouthShut for first hand product reviews and product information The site has been featured in The Economic Times, Times of India, CNBC, NDTV, and Star News,.In a CNBC-TV 18 interview MouthShut.com's CEO stated that the firm has more than 2 million (2005) registered members. Later, in the filings with Supreme Court of India in 2014, Mouthshut.com stated that the platform serves more than 7 million users per month. ==MouthShut in academic research== A number of articles and MouthShut's content has been used to cite consumer and culture pattern, such as Advertisement And Promotions: An Imc Perspective by Alan D'souza Kruti Shah (Paperback - 2008) A book published by Klett Verlag GmBH in Germany included reviews from MouthShut.com as additional reading material. This was used in Germany for school-level reading material. The firm has been used as a case study in Consumer Behavior (Wayne et. all, 2008) ==MouthShut controversy== To protect its review writers from threats from brands, the firm has stated that it will never reveal the identity of any of its writers unless requested by a court order. The site moved the Supreme Court against sec. 66A of the IT Act as well as reading down of the Rules for taking down of content. On April 29, 2013, MouthShut.com filed a petition in the Supreme Court of India to nullify India's Information Technology Rules 2011. The petition pleads to the Supreme Court that the IT Rules, 2011 should be struck down because they are so vague that it cannot be predicted with certainty as to what is prohibited and what is permitted. A consequence of this law would be the delegation of essential executive function to private parties like MouthShut.com to censor and restrict free speech of citizens or else face legal challenge for user's content. On Feb 3. 2014, a regional Indian ISP, Beam Fiber, blocked access to thesite for the citiesy of Bangalore and Hyderabad. As a result, more than half a million people could not access the site. On Feb 5, 2014, Beam Fiber unblocked the website. Indian laws do not allow ISPs to block a website unless ordered by the Department of Telecom. MouthShut termed the block as illegal and has sought compensation from the ISP.; it highlighted this illegal blockage in its petition to the Supreme Court of India. On December 2017, The Company had deleted 80000 fake user profiles & reviews ==Verdict by Supreme Court of India== On March 23, 2015, Mouthshut.com won the case against the government of India and Section 66A of the Information Technology Act has been struck down by the Supreme Court of India in Mouthshut.com v. Union of India. The judgement led to reading down of several sections of the Information Technology Act, as a result of which users are now free to post anything on the Internet == References == == External links == *Official Website Category:Review websites 
