Oak Grove Butterfield Stage Station is located in the western foothills of the Laguna Mountains, in northern San Diego County, California. It is located on State Route 79, northwest of Warner Springs and Warner's Ranch. The station was built on the site of Camp Wright, an 1860s Civil War outpost. ==Camp Wright== During the American Civil War, Camp Wright was a Union Army outpost in the Pacific Coast Theater of the American Civil War. It was established to protect the route to Fort Yuma on the Colorado River, and intercept secessionist sympathizers traveling to the east to join the Confederate Army.Warner Spring Ranch Resort.com: History-- John Warner A detachment of California Volunteer cavalry and infantry first established Camp Wright at Warner's Ranch near Warner Springs, in October 1861. The cold and windy conditions in the higher altitude of the exposed San Jose Valley caused the commander to change its site to the more sheltered Oak Grove location in November. Colonel Herbert M. Hart, USMC (retired), Historic California Posts: Camp Wright from Pioneer Forts of the Far West, published in 1965, The California State Military Museum At about the same time, the Dan Showalter party of secessionists were attempting to avoid the post and make their way across the desert to join the Confederate Army in Texas. They were pursued from Temecula by a 1st Regiment California Volunteer Cavalry patrol from Camp Wright, intercepted in the hills west of the San Jose Valley (site of Warner's Ranch) with the support of a 1st California Infantry detachment from the camp, and captured without shots being fired November 20-29, 1861. After being imprisoned at Fort Yuma, Showalter and the others were released upon swearing loyalty to the Union. They later made their way to the Confederacy. Bill Virden, THE AFFAIR AT MINTER'S RANCH, The Journal of San Diego History, SAN DIEGO HISTORICAL SOCIETY QUARTERLY, April 1961, Volume 7, Number 2 For a short time in March 1862 Camp Wright was the headquarters of the 5th Regiment California Volunteer Infantry before it moved on.Records of California men in the war of the rebellion 1861 to 1867, By California. Adjutant General's Office, SACRAMENTO: State Office, J. D. Young, Supt. State Printing. 1890. p.672 Used for the rest of the war as a transit camp for troops moving along the road to and from New Mexico Territory and Arizona Territory, the camp was abandoned in 1866. The Oak Grove Butterfield Stage Station, in operation between 1858 and 1860, is the only surviving station of the Butterfield Overland Mail stagecoach line across the Western United States. The adobe building the stagecoach station used was built in 1858, and on the former site of Camp Wright (1861-1862). It was a stop between Los Angeles and Fort Yuma on the San Francisco to St. Louis route. It is a well-preserved one-story adobe building among California oak woodlands. ==Historic Landmarks== Camp Wright plaque Oak Grove plaque The site of Camp Wright was registered as a California Historical Landmark in 1950. The Oak Grove Butterfield Stage Station on its site was registered as a separate California Historical Landmark in 1952. The Oak Grove station was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1961.Patricia Heintzelman and Charles Snell (1975) , National Park Service and The location of another nearby station at Warner's Ranch, is also a National Historic Landmark. ==See also== *Butterfield Overland Mail in California *Warner's Ranch Butterfield Stage Station *Pony Express *San Antonio-San Diego Mail Line ==References== ==External links== *National Park Service: Oak Grove Butterfield Station *National Park Service--Discover Our Shared Heritage program: "Early History of the California Coast" -- travel Itinerary. Category:Butterfield Overland Mail in California Category:Adobe buildings and structures in California Category:Transportation buildings and structures in San Diego County, California Category:California in the American Civil War Category:Forts in California Category:American Civil War army posts Category:Warner Springs, California Category:History of San Diego County, California Category:California Historical Landmarks Category:National Historic Landmarks in California Category:National Register of Historic Places in San Diego County, California Category:1858 establishments in California Category:1850s in California Category:1860s in California Category:Closed installations of the United States Army Category:American frontier Category:Laguna Mountains Category:Stagecoach stations on the National Register of Historic Places Category:Stagecoach stations in California Category:Transportation buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in California 
