Raul Isaias Baduel (born 6 July 1955) is a Venezuelan politician, retired general, and former Defense Minister under President Hugo Chavez. He was a member of Chavez' MBR-200, joining in December 1982. ==Career== ===Military=== Baduel was instrumental in restoring Chavez to power after the 2002 Venezuelan coup d'etat attempt, and was described by the BBC as "one of a small group of officers 'co-governing' Venezuela with Mr Chavez". He was commander-in-chief of the Venezuelan Army from 2004 until July 2007. ===Politics=== In 2007 Baduel left his position as Defense Minister. Chavez later said that he had removed Baduel from office because he had been unable to explain a string of irregularities.HARDtalk with Hugo Chavez, President of Venezuela, BBC News Channel, 11:30pm Friday 18 June 2010 After retiring as Defense Minister, he emerged in 2007 as an opposition leader, when he publicly broke with Chavez and announced his opposition to the constitutional changes proposed in the 2007 constitutional referendum (defeated via referendum) that would have strengthened the powers of the presidency and removed the restriction on public officials being re-elected. Baduel "emerged as a prominent voice of dissent" concerned that Chavez was taking Venezuela down a "road to ruin" and becoming authoritarian. He became the highest-ranking military person opposed to Chavez's constitutional changes that would "concentrate power in the executive". In July 2007, he said, "A socialist regime is not incompatible with a democratic system of checks and balances and division of powers. We must separate ourselves from Marxist orthodoxy." == Imprisonment == === Arrest and initial detention === In October 2008, a "military prosecutor said he was responsible for about $14 million that disappeared during his tenure as defense minister" in a transaction involving the purchase of military equipment. According to The New York Times, "Chavez has moved against a wide range of domestic critics, and his efforts in recent weeks to strengthen his grip on the armed forces have led to high-profile arrests and a wave of reassignments". On 2 April 2009, Baduel was arrested at gunpoint; Baduel said that his arrest was politically motivated with Chavez allies admitting he was in private. Baduel was placed in Ramo Verde Prison. According to The Guardian, he says "his crime was to realise - and declare - that the president was a tyrant". The 2009 Human Rights Watch report mentions Baduel as an example of political persecution. Former U.S. President Jimmy Carter expressed concern about the case, and Steve Ellner, a Venezuelan historian and analyst, noted that "courts overwhelmingly targeted opposition figures. 'Chavez's case would be much stronger if he went after corruption within his own government.' Arresting Baduel neutralised an opponent who could stir trouble in the army. 'Obviously throwing Baduel in jail had a political motivation.'" In April 2010, Amnesty International accused "the Venezuelan government of deliberately targeting opposition leaders and sympathizers". In May 2010, Baduel was convicted by a military court of corruption and sentenced to seven years and eleven months in prison; Baduel says he is innocent. The military court declared that US$3.9 million was misappropriated, according to interviews with members of various military units; Baduel's daughter said no proof existed and the main evidence was provided by soldiers who claimed to see another officer carrying some black bags. From Ramo Verde Prison, Baduel sent a Twitter message to family members, saying, "God is with us and divine justice is always active". He was released six years later in 2015. === Second detention === On 12 January 2017, Baduel was once again arrested following allegations from the Venezuelan government that he was plotting to overthrow the government. Multiple other opposition politicians were detained in what opposition politicians called trumped charges. Family members of Baduel have denounced that he is being kept in solitary isolation at an underground facility known as The Tomb () since late January, 2018. In June 2019, he was moved to the maximum security prison in . ==References== Category:1955 births Category:Fifth Republic Movement politicians Category:Living people Category:People from Guarico Category:United Socialist Party of Venezuela politicians Category:Venezuelan generals Category:Venezuelan military personnel Category:Venezuelan Ministers of Defense Category:Venezuelan politicians convicted of crimes Category:Prisoners and detainees of Venezuela Category:Venezuelan defectors Category:Forced disappearances in Venezuela 
