Roberto Miguel Battion (born March 1, 1982 in Santa Fe) is an Argentine football midfielder. He currently plays for Veria of the Superleague Greece. ==Career== Battion started his professional career in the Argentine Primera Division with Union de Santa Fe in 2002, but at the end of the 2002-03 season the club were relegated due to their poor points average. He stayed with the club for several seasons in the Argentine second division before returning to the Primera in 2007 to join Argentinos Juniors. He quickly established himself as a valued member of the first team squad. In 2008 Battion joined Aris Thessaloniki F.C. of Greece, but returned to Argentina in 2009 on loan to Banfield, where he was a key member of the squad that won the 2009 Apertura championship appearing in the majority of their games. In July 2010, after his loan contract at Banfield expired, Independiente bought Battion from Aris on a 3 million US dollars fee. Left Independiente in the summer of 2013 and joined Club Atletico All Boys of the first division. In August 18, 2014 Roberto signed in VeriaPaiktes tes Beroias o Roberto Battion Roberto scored his first goal with Veria in a home victory against Levadiakos. He also counts two assists. On 1 February 2015, he was sent off with a second yellow card, for a free kick. He ironically then applauded the referee for that decision, Sotiris Balafas was also sent off in 11', and the fans of Veria responded to the applauding as they recognized the message of Battion's action. Giannis Maniatis then, attacked towards the player and a mini fight begun into the football field between the players. Battion's action was accept with great enthusiasm from media as well as from the fans of Veria. These events took place in a 2-0 home defeat against Olympiacos F.C.. Battion has an oral renewal contract agreement but he expects for the football court of EPO to decide whether Veria will be relegated if found guilty for the fixed match case against Olympiacos in 2013. ==Honours== ;Banfield *Argentine Primera Division (1): 2009 Apertura ;Independiente *Copa Sudamericana (1): 2010 ==References== ==External links== * Guardian statistics * Argentine Primera statistics at Futbol XXI Category:1982 births Category:Living people Category:Sportspeople from Santa Fe, Argentina Category:Argentine footballers Category:Association football midfielders Category:Argentine Primera Division players Category:Super League Greece players Category:Union de Santa Fe footballers Category:Argentinos Juniors footballers Category:Aris Thessaloniki F.C. players Category:Banfield footballers Category:Club Atletico Independiente footballers Category:All Boys footballers Category:Argentine expatriate footballers Category:Expatriate footballers in Greece Category:Veria F.C. players 
