Ronnie Joe Jones (born October 17, 1955) is an American football coach. Jones has served on coaching staffs at numerous colleges and NFL teams, and is currently an assistant at Martin High School in Arlington, Texas. A native of Sunray, Texas, Jones graduated from Sunray High School in 1974. He went on to receive a bachelor's degree from Northwestern Oklahoma State University and a master's degree from Northeastern State University. While at Northeastern, he began his coaching career. In 1984, he joined John Cooper's staff at Tulsa as strength and conditioning coach and moved with him to Arizona State a year later. In 1987, he joined Buddy Ryan's coaching staff with the Philadelphia Eagles. After two stints with the Los Angeles Rams and Los Angeles Raiders in 1991 and 1992, respectively, Jones rejoined Ryan as linebackers coach for the Houston Oilers in 1993. As Ryan became head coach for the Arizona Cardinals, he selected Jones as his defensive coordinator. In 1995, Arizona ranked last in total defense in the NFL, giving up 26.4 points and 356.5 total yards per game. Ryan and his complete staff were fired subsequently. Heading back to the collegiate ranks, Jones became defensive coordinator at the University of Texas at El Paso under coach Charlie Bailey. In 2000, Bailey was replaced by Gary Nord, so Jones went on to coach the special teams for the Buffalo Bills. Jones became head coach at Ottawa University, a small NAIA school in Ottawa, Kansas. Jones was the 27th head coach for the Braves and he held that position for the 2001 season. The Ottawa Braves, coming of a 9-0 season in 2000, finished 6-4 under Jones, who then left for West Texas A&M; University. Despite making the bold statement that West Texas A&M; would win an NCAA Division II national football championship under his guidance, Jones amassed only a 5-27 record as Buffaloes head coach. He currently serves as defensive coordinator at Arlington Martin High School.2007 Martin Warrior Football Coaching Staff ==Head coaching record== ==References== Category:1955 births Category:Living people Category:American strength and conditioning coaches Category:Arizona Cardinals coaches Category:Arizona State Sun Devils football coaches Category:Buffalo Bills coaches Category:High school football coaches in Texas Category:Houston Oilers coaches Category:Los Angeles Raiders coaches Category:Los Angeles Rams coaches Category:National Football League defensive coordinators Category:Northeastern State University alumni Category:Northeastern State RiverHawks football coaches Category:Northwestern Oklahoma State University alumni Category:People from Dumas, Texas Category:Philadelphia Eagles coaches Category:Players of American football from Texas Category:Tulsa Golden Hurricane football coaches Category:UTEP Miners football coaches Category:West Texas A&M; Buffaloes football coaches 
