Saint Senhorinha of Basto (; c. 942 - 982) was a Portuguese Benedictine abbess in what is today northern Portugal. She is a saint in the Roman Catholic Church and was related to Saint Rudesind of Mondonedo. ==Life== Senhorinha of Basto is thought to have been born into the noble Sousa family as either Domitilla or Genoveva. After being raised by her aunt, Blessed Godinha, abbess of the Benedictine convent of St. John of Vieira, Senhorinha also joined the Benedictines and succeeded her aunt as abbess at Vieira. Later, she moved the convent of Vieira to Basto near Braga, Portugal. ==Legacy== Senhorinha of Basto was canonized by Paio Mendes, Archbishop of Braga, in 1130, at a time when bishops had the authority to canonize faithful people in their dioceses. Her feast day is April 22, which is recorded in Portuguese liturgical calendars beginning in the 13th century. Her shrine in Basto was a popular pilgrimage destination in the region in the 12th and 13th centuries. King Sancho I of Portugal was one famous devotee who made the pilgrimage to cure his son and heir, Afonso II, who was healed and succeeded Sancho I as king of Portugal. The church in Basto has been named in her honor since at least 1220, and water from a nearby fountain named after her is believed to have healing properties. Her tomb is housed in the church. In art, she is typically depicted with a water jug or vessel at her side and sometimes a frog, in reference to one of the miracles she is said to have performed during her life. ==References== ==See also== *Kingdom of Galicia Category:Benedictine nuns Category:10th-century births Category:982 deaths Category:Female saints of medieval Portugal Category:10th-century Christian saints Category:Year of birth unknown Category:10th-century Christian nuns Category:10th-century people from the Kingdom of Leon Category:10th-century Portuguese women Category:10th-century Portuguese people Category:10th-century Visigothic people Category:Medieval Portuguese saints Category:Portuguese Roman Catholic religious sisters and nuns Category:People from Vieira do Minho 
