Skiff is a hamlet in southern Alberta, Canada within the County of Forty Mile No. 8. It is located on Highway 61, also known as the historic Red Coat Trail, approximately southeast of Lethbridge. ==Regional attractions== ;Devil's Coulee Dinosaur Heritage Museum: The Devil's Coulee Dinosaur Heritage Museum features a Hadrosaur (duck-billed dinosaur) nest and embryo, ancient fossils, dinosaur models, located in the Warner. ;Galt Historic Railway Park: The Galt Historic Railway Park located 1 km north of Stirling is another popular museum which displays of life and travel in the 1880s to 1920s are set up in the restored 1890 North West Territories International Train Station from Coutts, Alberta, Canada and Sweetgrass, Montana, USA. The station was moved to the current location near Stirling in 2000 and is added onto every year. Future plans to move the 1925 Oglvie grain elevator from Wrentham for display along the station in the park is still in the planning stages. ;Stirling Agricultural Village: Stirling Agricultural Village is a National Historic Site of Canada, and was listed as one of only three communities in Canada designated as a National Historic Site because of the community's well preserved settlement pattern that follows the Plat of Zion model. Located within the village are two museums the Michelsen Farmstead a totally restored 1900s home showcasing rural life in Alberta in the 1930s. Listed as a Provincial Historic Site in 2001., and the Galt Historic Railway Park. ;Warner elevator row: The Warner elevator row is a row of historic wood-cribbed grain elevators. A total of six elevators still stand in a row alongside the Canadian Pacific Railway at the east entrance of the village of Warner. Due to the loss of a vast amount of Alberta's many grain elevators, the elevator row in Warner remains the last row of elevators in Alberta. Only two elevator rows remain in Canada, Warner's row and the elevators in Inglis, Manitoba. ;Waterton Lakes National Park Waterton Lakes National Park is a National Park located in the extreme southwest corner of Alberta, Canada, 40 km west of Cardston, and borders Glacier National Park in Montana, USA. Waterton Lakes was Canada's fourth National Park formed in 1895. The Rocky Mountains rise suddenly out of the rolling prairies in the park. Amid the peaks are the three Waterton Lakes, carved out of the rock by ancient glaciers. ;Writing On Stone Provincial Park Writing-on-Stone Provincial Park, is one of the largest areas of protected prairie in the Alberta park system, and serves as both a nature preserve and protection for the largest concentration of rock art, created by Plains People. There are over 50 rock art sites, with thousands of figures, as well as numerous archeological sites. ==Skiff Meteorite== Skiff farmer Bill Nemeth found a meteorite in the ground on his farm (NE1/4-31-3-4-W4) in 1966. Twelve years later he sold it to the U of A Geology department. The date of its landing is unknown, but evidence says it was not very old, geologically speaking.Anthony Whyte, The Meteorites of Alberta (2009) == See also == *List of communities in Alberta *List of hamlets in Alberta == References == ==External links== *Skiff, Alberta at Google Maps Category:County of Forty Mile No. 8 Category:Hamlets in Alberta 
