Tawas Point Light is located in the Tawas Point State Park off Tawas Bay in Lake Huron in Baldwin Township in Northern Michigan. ==History== In 1850, Congress appropriated $5,000 for the construction of a lighthouse. In 1852, construction started, and the lighthouse was commissioned in 1853. After the lighthouse was built, many problems were encountered. Shifting sands caused the point to be extended by nearly a mile. The original light was a 5th Order Fresnel lens, later upgraded when the building was replaced. In 1867, the Inspector of the lighthouse said that the lighthouse was wearing down to the point where they should consider renovating it. The Lighthouse Board ignored his request to put more money in the lighthouse because they had bigger problems at hand in Ottawa Point. The waves caused sand build-up by the Point, which added almost a mile, more of land. The lighthouse was so far inland that mariners were unable to see the lighthouse's light. To add to the problem this lighthouse was known for its dim light. With all these problems combined, it caused a shipwreck from Captain Olmstead's schooner "Dolphin". He blamed the lighthouse stating that it was too dim to see the light. This caused the Lighthouse board to reconsider their option at renovating or rebuilding a new one. In 1875 Congress approved a $30,000 amount for a brand new lighthouse. They finished building the lighthouse sometime in 1877. It was originally known as Ottawa Point. The name was officially changed to Tawas Point in 1902. The point is a substantial hazard to navigation. Additionally, because it is tucked behind the point, Tawas Bay is an ideal shelter from storms, wind and waves out of the north and northeast. The point juts out into Lake Huron, and has been getting much larger over time. A map is available, which shows the accretion. The original light was begun in 1852, and completed in 1853. The light was fueled at various times by lard oil, then kerosene, and the current light is of course now electric. This is the second lighthouse on the point. The tower is tall including the base, with a diameter at base of and a diameter at parapet of It is constructed of a brick outer wall, and an inner wall: 24 inches/8 inches thick, respectively. There is an air space between walls of . The tower has in place a Fourth Order Fresnel lens . The light can be seen for , and has a lens focal plane above Lake Huron's average water level. The Keeper's House is long and wide.A Child's View of the Tawas Point Light, Michigan Time Traveler: Lansing State Journal. It is currently being remodeled by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, with the assistance and contributions of the Friends of Tawas Point State Park. The downstairs eventually will become a museum for the lighthouse and the upstairs becoming a mini-cabin available for rent by the public. The house is itself available for one and two week stays (for a fee, and with an agreement to act as a trained volunteer).Kart, Jess, Tawas Point Lighthouse looks for boarders willing to pay for privilege of living in working structure, June 4, 2008. The Bay City Times. Volunteer keepers will stay for up to two weeks. Because of its popularity, picturesque form and location, it is often the subject of photographs, and even of needlepoint illustrations.Needlepoint of Tawas Point Light. The Tawas lifesaving station has recently been saved and renovation continues. The Fresnel lens is still operative, being one of Only 70 such lenses that remain operational in the United States, sixteen of which are use on the Great Lakes of which eight are in Michigan.United States Coast Guard, Fresnel Lenses Still in Operation . In October 2015, the Coast Guard announced that it would remove the Fresnel lens and replace it with a modern optic beacon. But after public comments, the lens remains in place. ==Current events== An enlarged replica called the "Tri-Centennial Light of Detroit" is modeled after the Tawas Point Light, was built at Tri-Centennial State Park. The lighthouse is 63 feet tall, and marks the harbor entrance. "The new safety light tower is believed to be the first conical brick structure of this type built in Michigan since 1892 and serves as a tribute to Michigan's Great Lakes maritime history."Welcome to Tri-Centennial State Park and Harbor, Michigan Department of Natural Resources. New information from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources has confirmed the private sale of the Tawas Point Light in early March, 2013. Sold for an undisclosed amount, renovations by the state of Michigan will continue to proceed. ==See also== *Lighthouses in the United States ==References== ==External links== * Tawas Point Lighthouse - official site * A Child's View of the Tawas Point Light, Michigan Time Traveler: Lansing State Journal and Michigan Historical Center. * Aerial photos, Tawas Point Light, marinas.com. * Crompton, Samuel Willard & Michael J. Rhein, The Ultimate Book of Lighthouses (2002) ; . * Detroit News, Interactive map on Michigan lighthouses. * Hyde, Charles K., and Ann and John Mahan. The Northern Lights: Lighthouses of the Upper Great Lakes. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1995. . * Interactive map, list, information for lighthouses in North and West Lake Huron. * Jones, Ray & Bruce Roberts, American Lighthouses (Globe Pequot, September 1, 1998, 1st Ed.) ; . * Jones, Ray,The Lighthouse Encyclopedia, The Definitive Reference (Globe Pequot, January 1, 2004, 1st ed.) ; . * Lighthouse Central, Tawas Point Light Photographs, History and Directions, The Ultimate Guide to East Michigan Lighthouses by Jerry Roach (Publisher: Bugs Publishing LLC - July 2006). ; . * National Park Service Maritime Heritage Program, Inventory of Historic Lights, Tawas Point Light. * Noble, Dennis, Lighthouses & Keepers: U. S. Lighthouse Service and Its Legacy (Annapolis: U. S. Naval Institute Press, 1997). ; . * Oleszewski, Wes, Great Lakes Lighthouses, American and Canadian: A Comprehensive Directory/Guide to Great Lakes Lighthouses, (Gwinn, Michigan: Avery Color Studios, Inc., 1998) . * Penrod, John, Lighthouses of Michigan, (Berrien Center, Michigan: Penrod/Hiawatha, 1998) . * Penrose, Laurie and Bill, A Traveler's Guide to 116 Michigan Lighthouses (Petoskey, Michigan: Friede Publications, 1999). . * * Putnam, George R., Lighthouses and Lightships of the United States, (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1933). * Satellite view, Google. * Tawas Point light house geography and history. * Tawas Point State Park detail. * Terry Pepper, "Seeing the Light," History of Tawas Point Light. * * U.S. Lighthouses on Tawas Point light, * United States Coast Guard, Aids to Navigation, (Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1945). * * * * U.S. Coast Guard Search & Rescue Index * Wagner, John L., Michigan Lighthouses: An Aerial Photographic Perspective, (East Lansing, Michigan: John L. Wagner, 1998) . *Wobser, David, Towas Point Light, boatnerd.com, * Wright, Larry and Wright, Patricia, Great Lakes Lighthouses Encyclopedia Hardback (Erin: Boston Mills Press, 2006) . Category:Lighthouses completed in 1853 Category:Lighthouses completed in 1876 Category:Lighthouses on the National Register of Historic Places in Michigan Category:Museums in Iosco County, Michigan Category:Lighthouse museums in Michigan Category:Michigan State Historic Sites Category:National Register of Historic Places in Iosco County, Michigan 
