The Huntercombe Group Logo ( 2014 onwards ) The Huntercombe Group is a specialist health provider in the United Kingdom operated by Four Seasons Health Care, it has 56 hospitals and specialist centres located throughout England and Scotland. It specialises in specific areas of health including: eating disorders, mental health and specialist brain injury services. In 1998, Crestacare was acquired by Four Seasons Healthcare and The Huntercombe Group was born. This included Huntercombe Brain Injury Centre in Murdostoun, Scotland; Huntercombe Hospital Maidenhead; Frenchay Brain injury Centre; and Blackheath Brain Injury Centre. At this point the company operated 134 beds. in 2004 it had a total of 1426 beds. The Huntercombe Hospital, Stafford has been criticised heavily for a lack of staff and failing to intervene when a patient self-harmed with contraband items.https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk- england-stoke-staffordshire-37226205 ==Funding== Patients are funded largely by the NHS and Local Authorities and, since the changes in NHS commissioning, provides some of its services under the NHS England Contract. ==Performance== Linden House was a Huntercombe assessment and treatment unit (ATU) in the East Riding, which has been closed since December 2014. Stephanie Bincliffe, who had a learning disability and autism, was placed there when she was 18 and kept in a padded room where she had little or no fresh air or exercise for almost seven years until her death. She gained ten stone during her time in the unit, becoming morbidly obese and yet she had no independent access to food. Some of the evidence at the inquest into her death criticised the hospital's management of her physical health and obesity. It was alleged that hospital staff failed to act in her best interests regarding her weight gain, contrary to the requirements of the Mental Capacity Act 2005. However, the inquest into the death of Miss Bincliffe found there was no evidence of neglect and that her weight could not have been easily managed due to her severe autism and the level of self-harming which would have resulted from any attempt to alter her diet or get her to exercise more. Furthermore, due to a pre-existing heart condition (which ultimately proved fatal) surgery was not an option. Watcombe Hall in Torquay, was closed to new admissions on the second day of an inspection by the Care Quality Commission in May 2017. Young people with malnutrition and dehydration had been repeatedly admitted to Torbay Hospital. The CQC found staff had not received specific training in caring for young people with eating disorders. Inspectors saw a young person climb a fence and abscond. It was told by the Care Quality Commission to improve its corporate governance in 2018, and to recruit more experienced Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services staff. Cedar House, a low secure unit for 39 people with learning disabilities and autism, in Barham, Kent was inspected by the Care Quality Commission in February 2020 and put into special measures because of excessive use of restraint measures, much on one inappropriately placed patient. == References == == External links == * The Huntercombe Group - www.huntercombe.com * Report from the Medical Health Act Commission Category:Private providers of NHS services Category:Social care in the United Kingdom Category:1998 establishments in the United Kingdom 
