Wayne Chatfield-Taylor (December 19, 1893 - November 22, 1967) was Under Secretary of Commerce and Assistant Secretary of the Treasury under President Franklin D. Roosevelt. ==Early life== Chatfield-Taylor was born in Chicago, Illinois on December 19, 1893 . He was the eldest of three sons and one daughter born to Rose (nee Farwell) Chatfield-Taylor by Hobart Chatfield- Taylor, an author and biographer who was considered a top authority on Moliere. His siblings were Robert, Otis, and Adelaide Chatfield-Taylor (wife of Hendricks Hallett Whitman and William Davies Sohier and grandmother of Meg Whitman). After his mother died in 1918, his father married Estelle (nee Barbour) Stillman, the widow of George S. Stillman and daughter of George Harrison Barbour, in 1920. His paternal grandparents were Henry Hobart Taylor and Adelaide (nee Chatfield) Taylor. His father added "Chatfield" to his surname as the stipulation of a large inheritance from his maternal uncle, Wayne Chatfield. His maternal grandparents were U.S. Senator Charles B. Farwell (brother of John V. Farwell) and Mary Eveline (nee Smith) Farwell. His maternal aunt Anna Farwell married the composer Reginald de Koven. Wayne was a graduate of St. Mark's School in Southborough, Massachusetts and of Yale University. During World War I, he served overseas as a Lieutenant in the U.S. Army. ==Career== Chatfield-Taylor began his business career in 1916 with the Central Trust Company of Illinois (which had been formed in 1901 by former Comptroller of the Currency Charles G. Dawes before he became Vice President of the United States under Calvin Coolidge). Later, he worked for Field, Glore, Ward & Co., an investment banking house in Chicago, becoming vice president of the business in 1927. He was also vice president of the Chicago Investors corporation and a director of the People's Trust and Savings Bank. He also served the government in administrative and advisory capacities from 1933 to 1952. He first joined President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal administration in 1933 as assistant to the Administrator of the Agricultural Adjustment Administration before becoming special advisor to the President on foreign affairs. He joined the Export-Import Bank as a vice president 1935 before succeeding L. W. Robert Jr. as the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury under Secretary Henry Morgenthau Jr. in 1936. He resigned in February 1939 over differences over Treasury policies with Secretary Morgenthau to become the European delegate of the American Red Cross. He returned to government service in October 1940 becoming the Under Secretary of Commerce under Secretary Jesse H. Jones in 1940,Wayne-Chatfield TaylorWayne Chatfield Taylor Named Undersecretary of Commerce serving until 1945. In 1944, he was the federal official who took charge of Montgomery Ward & Co.'s Chicago plant after it was ordered seized by the government and the firm's chairman, Sewell Avery, was removed form the premises by soldiers. In April 1945, resigned from the Commerce Department to return to Export-Import Bank after being elected president. He served in that role until the position was abolished under the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945. Later economic advisor to Paul G. Hoffman in setting up the Economic Cooperation Administration, Chatfield-Taylor was also economic advisor to the European Recovery Program (better known as the Marshall Plan) after World War II. ==Personal life== York Hall in Yorktown, Virginia. On August 22, 1917, Chatfield-Taylor was married to Adele Margaret Blow (1895-1977). Adele, a daughter of George Preston Blow (namesake of the Blow Gymnasium at the College of William & Mary) and Adele (nee Matthiessen) Blow (a daughter of Frederick William Matthiessen), was a vice president and co-founder of the National Women's Democratic Club. She also served as vice chairman of the United Nations War Relief and was a board member of the Home for Incurables. Together, they lived at York Hall in Yorktown, Virginia and were the parents of four children, including: * Hobart Chatfield-Taylor (1918-1992), who married Mary Owen Lyon, a daughter of Moncure Nelson Lyon, in 1963. They divorced in 1972. * Adelaide Chatfield-Taylor (1920-2007), who married law professor John Marshall Kernochan, parents of two-time Academy Award winner Sarah Kernochan. * Rose Chatfield-Taylor (1921-1997), a poet who married Dr. Frank Goodnow MacMurray, a Harvard Medical School graduate who served as officer-in-charge of a polio ward in Walter Reed General Hospital, in 1941. He was the son of diplomat John Van Antwerp MacMurray and grandson of Dr. Frank Johnson Goodnow (president of Johns Hopkins University). * Richard Farwell Chatfield-Taylor (1925-2007), who married Eleanor Ong, a daughter of Harry Alfred Ong, in 1948. He built the noted 1925 Lake Forest, Illinois mansion "Bluff's Edge" located at 620 Lake Road. His wife, a descendant of a family that settled in Virginia in 1609 and a member of the Colonial Dames of America, restored thirty historic homes and buildings, including the Thomas Nelson House (also known as York Hall) in Yorktown, Virginia, the Federal House, Nantucket, Massachusetts, and Mantua, a classic structure in Heathsville, Virginia. Chatfield-Taylor died at the Washington Medical Center in Washington, D.C. on November 22, 1967. He was buried at Rock Creek Cemetery in Washington. His widow died on August 31, 1977 in Greenwich, Connecticut and was buried at Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond, Virginia. ==References== ==External links== * * Category:1967 deaths Category:1893 births Category:People from Chicago Category:St. Mark's School (Massachusetts) alumni Category:Yale University alumni Category:20th-century American economists Category:Economists from Illinois Category:United States Under Secretaries of Commerce Category:United States Assistant Secretaries of the Treasury 
