William Hunter Bennett (5 November 1910 - 23 July 1980) was a general authority of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) from 1970 until his death. Bennett was born in Taber, Alberta, Canada. He attended the School of Agriculture in Raymond, Alberta, and earned bachelor's and master's degrees in agriculture from Utah State University (USU), as well as a Ph.D. in agriculture from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He joined the faculty of USU as a professor of agronomy. Bennett married Patricia June Christensen. They were the parents of six children. Bennett was an avid sportsman and in 1936 tried out for the Canadian Summer Olympics team in the shot put and discus throw. In 1970, while serving in the LDS Church as a regional representative, Bennett was called as an Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and a general authority of the church. Bennett served in this position until 1976, when the position of Assistant to the Twelve was abolished. At that time, Bennett became a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, where he served until 1978, when he was designated as an emeritus general authority. Bennett died at his home in Bountiful, Utah. ==References== *"Elder William H. Bennett Dies," Ensign, Sep. 1980, p. 79 *Leon R. Hartshorn. Outstanding Stories by General Authorities. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1975) Vol. 3, p. 1 ==External links== *Grampa Bill's G.A. Pages: William H. Bennett Category:1910 births Category:1980 deaths Category:Canadian general authorities (LDS Church) Category:Members of the First Quorum of the Seventy (LDS Church) Category:People from Taber, Alberta Category:University of Wisconsin-Madison College of Agricultural and Life Sciences alumni Category:Utah State University alumni Category:Utah State University faculty Category:Regional representatives of the Twelve Category:Canadian agronomists Category:Assistants to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles Category:Latter Day Saints from Wisconsin Category:Canadian expatriates in the United States 
