The Yoruba Academy is an independent, non-profit, non-partisan, non- governmental, multi-disciplinary institution set up to shepherd the growth and development of Yoruba language, arts, and culture, through collaboration with scholars, politicians, businessmen and experts in Yoruba language, culture, economics, law, science and technology, and governance. It was founded in Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria in October 2007 following a retreat of young Yoruba professionals, and it is currently operated by the Afenifere Renewal Group. Its main mission is to ensure the preservation and revitalization of the Yoruba language as well as the socio-cultural and economic development of the Yoruba peoples worldwide -- that is, both in its South-West homeland in Nigeria and in the Diaspora. It is also committed to encouraging and funding research and systematic reflections on the history, culture, position, and future of the Yoruba in the context of Nigeria and in a globalising world, towards helping to create and sustain freedom of thought, and providing a platform for effective linkage between research and human development. == History == The Academy came into being through two disparate organisations working towards the same goal at different times. One was led by the former minister for education Professor Babatunde Fafunwa and Professor Wale Omole, and another when, in 2007, a group of Yoruba elders gathered at the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture in Ibadan to discuss the future of the language. It was suggested that the two efforts be merged and called The Yoruba Academy. Professor Fafunwa was elected as its first Chairman of Board of Trustees. The mission of the Academy is to look after Yoruba language worldwide, advocate for policies that will ensure it survival and revitalization, organize activities and events to further these goals, and support the creation of a dictionary to set a standard for the Yoruba language. The Academy, in this way, is modelled after Academie Francaise, the preeminent council for the French language, the Goethe-Institut and the Confucius Institute. Yoruba language is currently spoken in Nigeria, but mostly in the South-West of the country in Ekiti State, Lagos State, Ogun State, Oyo State, Osun State, Ondo State, parts of Kwara State, Kogi State, Edo State, Delta State and Niger State; but also in other African countries like Togo, Benin, Sierra Leone and parts of Ghana; and outside of Africa in Haiti, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Brazil, United States, and the United Kingdom. == The Mandate of the Academy == According to its founding documents, the Yoruba Academy will: * Conserve, enrich and promote the heritage of the Yoruba, its culture, tradition, ethics and values * Deepen the knowledge and understanding of Yoruba language and culture and work towards its preservation * Document Yoruba contribution to world civilisation * Encourage and promote continuous acquisition and management of knowledge to guide Yoruba growth and development * Promote scholarship that focuses on addressing development challenges of the Yoruba and innovating for the public good * Formulate strategic development policies for the Yoruba * Promote cultural, social and economic institutions * Organise cultural and technical exchanges between Yoruba in the homeland and Yoruba in the Diaspora: * Carry out other activities that promote the broad vision and mission of the Yoruba Academy This framework accommodates every Yoruba in the Homeland and the Diaspora, as well as friends and scholars of Yoruba. == Past events == The Academy has organized events, talks, and commemoration activities since its founding. In 2016, it brought all the Yoruba kings and governors to Ibadan to mark the "120th Jubilee of World's Longest Civil War" == Directors == The Academy is supported by a Management Committee and a Board of Trustee. It is led by a Director who is appointed for a multi-year tenure. Since its inception, it has had four directors. * Professor Wale Adebanwi (2008-2011) * Dr Iyabo Basir (2011-2012) * Dr. Ade Adeagbo (2012-2018) * Kola Tubosun (incumbent; appointed September 2020). == External links == * Website == References == Category:Education in Nigeria Category:Language regulators Academy Academy Academy Category:Organizations established in 2007 Category:2007 establishments in Nigeria 
