The Museo Jumex's saw-tooth roof allows for indirect natural lighting and alludes to the area's industrial past. Nuevo Polanco (English, "New Polanco") is an area of Mexico City formerly consisting of warehouses and factories, bordering the upscale Polanco on the north across Avenida Ejercito Nacional.Nuevo Polanco website Officially it consists of two colonias, Granada and Ampliacion Granada. Railroad to Cuernavaca crossing Marina Nacional, 1910s. This area is undergoing an accelerated process of re-conversion and development. With a major transformation taking place, it is one of the fastest and most important real estate development areas in the country. Taking advantage of their now prime location, big pieces of land originally occupied mainly by industries are being used to build large housing, office, commercial and cultural developments with shops, restaurants, cinemas, museums, a 1,500-seat theater, a luxury hotel, etc. Many of them integrate in their name the word 'Polanco' thus seeking to capitalize on its reputation. In October 2013, the Secretariat of Urban Development and Housing (SEDUVI) put a stop to further development until a master plan for dealing with the infrastructure problems was approved. At that time the population of Nuevo Polanco was 76,000, twice as high as originally foreseen, with 23,469 housing units. Nuevo Polanco had gained attention in the international press as an example of how development can go wrong if there is no proper planning for infrastructure.Robbie Whelan, "Tony Mexico City Neighborhood Becomes a Cautionary Tale", Wall Street Journal, June 3, 2014 The area has now largely been converted into new shopping and mixed-use developments. These include: *Acuario Inbursa, Mexico's largest aquarium, opened in June 2014 * Antara Polanco a fashionable shopping and restaurants center, built on the land previously occupied by a General Motors de Mexico car assembly plant * Plaza Carso, a large cultural, commercial, office and living complex owned by Carlos Slim,http://www.plazacarso.com/ built on the land formerly occupied by General Popo-General Tire battery and tire plant. The total cost of the complex is quoted between USD 800 million"Emperor's New Museum", Wall Street Journal, March 3, 2011 and 1.4 billion.ICSC website The complex claims to be the largest mixed-use development in Latin America"Quienes somos", Plaza Carso website, retrieved April 13, 2013 and includes the following components: **Museo Soumaya, owned by the Carlos Slim Foundation. The museum contains the Slim's extensive art, religious relic, historical document, and coin collection. The museum holds works by many of the best known European artists from the 15th to the 20th century including a large collection of casts of sculptures by Auguste Rodin. The building is a shiny silver cloud-like structure reminiscent of a Rodin sculpture. ** Museo Jumex, opening November 2013, to house part of the Coleccion Jumex, the contemporary art collection of the Jumex juice company. ** Plaza Carso shopping center, featuring an Saks Fifth Avenue store, the second to have opened in Mexico.VMSD website Together with the atrium this section measures . **Teatro Cervantes theater, seating 1500 ** Residential towers: Torre Dali, Torre Monet and Torre Rodin **Office towers,"Corporativo", Plaza Carso website two of 23 floors each, and one of 20 floors. The three buildings are joined on the lower 3 levels by an atrium and the shopping center. The towers are: Torre Telcel - the headquarters of America Movil are here; Torre Falcon, and Torre Zurich. *Miyana, one of the largest mixed-use developments in the city, consisting of apartment buildings, a VIP Cinepolis, several stores and tens of restaurants and eating places. *Grand Polanco,http://www.viveengrand.com/ developed on the land previously occupied by a Chrysler franchise *Parques Polanco, first occupied by Fabricas Automex, a Chrysler car assembly plant *Portika Polanco *Ventanas Polancohttp://www.ventanapolanco.com.mx/ *Terret Polanco (office complex, under construction), located in land previously used by a factory producing yeasthttp://www.terretpolanco.mx *Polarea,http://www.polarea.com.mx/ located on the grounds until recently occupied the plant of Vitro, a glass factory. *Alto Polanco (apartments, under construction), http://altopolanco.mx/ on the grounds previously housing the H. Steele y Compania office furniture factory (formerly the Cia. Hulera Euzkadi tire plant) The new headquarters of the United States Embassy in Mexico will be located in New Polanco, a large complex to be built on land previously used for a Colgate-Palmolive plant. ==References== ==External links== * Ramirez, Kenya. "Alistan plan maestro para Nuevo Polanco." El Exelsior. June 1, 2014. Category:Miguel Hidalgo, Mexico City Category:Neighborhoods in Mexico City Category:Mixed-use developments in Mexico Category:Shopping districts and streets in Mexico 
