Oktyabr (meaning October in English) is a monthly Russian literary magazine, based in Moscow. In addition to Novy Mir and Znamya the monthly is a leading and deep-rooted literary magazine in Russia. ==History== Oktyabr was launched in 1924 by a group with the same name, "Oktyabr", which was founded by the poet Alexander Bezymensky and the novelist Yury Libedinsky in 1922. It was an official and conservative magazine of the Soviet Union. Particularly during the post-World War II period it became one of the most pro-government publications and was instrumental in shaping the image of Soviet poetry. The editorial board of the magazine in the Soviet era included those figures recognized by the state. The first chief editor was Labory Kalmanson who was also known as G. Lelevich. Fyodor Ivanovich served as chief editor of the monthly for two times (from 1931 to 1954, and then from 1957 to 1961). Vsevolod Kochetov was one of the magazine's chief editors in the 1960s. In the same period, the monthly was a fierce critic of Nikita Khrushchev's reforms, adopting a Stalinist stance. Anatoly Ananiev replaced Kochetov as chief editor of Oktyabr. The current editor-in-chief is Irina Barmetova.Book Launch Party for Autobiography of a Corpse by Sigizmund Krzhizhanovsky Read Russia. 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2013. The magazine awards the Oktyabr prize. The 2013 winners were Andrey Bitov for the story "Something with love... ", director Leonid Heifetz for his article "Flashes" and poet Lev Kozlowski for a selection of verses "Sukhoy Bridge".The Oktyabr magazine the Writer Andrey Bitov will award Andrey Bitov and Leonid Heifetz Ru paper. 25 December 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2013. ==Content== Oktyabr has serialized various novels, published poems and other articles about movies and societal issues. Due to such a wide coverage, the magazine is compared to the 19th century edition of Edinburgh Review. in the late 1970s, Anatoly Rybakov's novel, Heavy Sands, was serialized in the monthly. Life and Fate, a novel written by Vasily Grossman, was first published in the magazine in 1988. This novel was one of the forbidden literary works in the country and therefore, the magazine became among the publications publishing previously forbidden books in the glasnost period. In 2006, the magazine published Vasili Aksyonov's novel Moskva-kva- kva. The monthly also published poems of significant and state-recognized poets in the Soviet era, forming the image of Soviet poetry, and works on literary criticism. In addition to literary works, in the 1960s the magazine covered articles on Soviet films, focusing on the merits of these movies. Mikhail Antonov's a seminal essay, "So What Is Happening to Us?", was published in Oktyabr in 1989. In 1989, the magazine published a posthumous work, Forever Flowing, by Vasily Grossman, arguing "Lenin - all victories of the party and the state are linked with the name of Lenin. But all cruelty committed in the country has become the tragic burden of Vladimir Ilych." The article was written long before, but it was one of the first overt criticisms against Lenin. Thus, it marked a serious challenge process towards the past of the country, especially Lenin's legacy. ==References== Category:1924 establishments in the Soviet Union Category:Communist magazines Category:Eastern Bloc mass media Category:Literary magazines published in Russia Category:Literary magazines published in the Soviet Union Category:Magazines established in 1924 Category:Magazines published in Moscow Category:Monthly magazines published in Russia Category:Poetry literary magazines Category:Russian-language magazines 
