Omalos () is a small village in western Crete, in the Mousouroi unit of the Chania region. The Greek word Omalos means even, plain, regular, or smooth, referring to the plateau. == Description == Omalos is situated at the northeastern corner of the Omalos Plateau (oropedio tou Omalou), 38 km south of Chania in the White Mountains (Lefka Ori). The plateau has an area of 15 km2, and lies on the intersection of three districts, namely the Mousouroi unit of Platanias (previously Kydonia), Sfakia and East Selino. Although the settlement is in Mousouroi, most of the plateau lies in East Selino. The plateau has three approaches, from the west, from the Chania-Sougia road, from the north at Omalos and from the south where one descends through the Samaria Gorge to the coast at Agia Roumeli on the Libyan Sea. Omalos itself is about 5 km from the entrance to the gorge at Xyloskalo,Wikimapia and derives most of its importance from its association with trekking. An old stone mule track connects Omalos with Agia Eirini to the west, from whence access to the next gorge to the west, the Agia Eirini Gorge is made. The cooler climate and fertile soil lends itself to growing vegetables and fruit such as potatoes and apples, together with cereals. Small round stone houses (mitata) are used for making local cheese (graviera).Visit Greece: Mitata In the warmer seasons shepherds bring their flocks onto pastures (madares, madares) on the slopes of the Lefka Ori.Loraine Wilson. The High Mountains of Crete: A walking and trekking guide. 2nd ed. Cicerone Press Limited, 2010. == Geography == Omalos plateau Originally a lake, it is thought to have lost its waters through the Tzani Cave.Tzanis Cave The cave is found to the right of the winding road from Omalos, descending towards Chania, about 1.6 km from Omalos. At Xyloskalo (1250m), two peaks rise - Gingilos (2080m) and Volakias (2116m), which legend associates with the throne of Zeus, who was born in Crete. Further west are Agathopi (1768m) and Psilafi (1984m), supposedly Zeus' racing grounds, but now slalom ski racing. ==History == Hatzimihalis Yiannaris 1833-1916,. Photo dated 1890 During the uprisings against the Ottoman Empire. the Turks rarely managed to penetrate the plateau. The name Omalos is said to have derived from a revolutionary song "Pote tha kanei xasteria pote tha Phlebarisei na paro to toupheki mou...na katebo ston Omalo" Rethemnos: "Pote tha kamei xasteria" The Tzani cave is named after Tzanis Markos a revolutionary chieftain in the early years of the Turkish invasion who made it his lair. He was nicknamed "Fobos" (fear). The cave is about 2.5 km long, and descends 241 metres. It is actually a covered gorge.Tzanis or Homos Cave by Omalos The Cretan revolutionary Hatzimichalis Giannaris (1833-1916) was born in nearby Lakkoi, and was prominent in the 1855-1869 conflicts, captured but escaped from prison in Chania and then exiled to Odessa. In 1912 he was elected to the Greek parliament. Although he died in Chania his wish was to be buried in Omalos, where by the Tzani cave stands a church dedicated to him.Institute for Neohellenic Research During World War II the plateau was used as an airfield. ==References== == External links == * Wikimapia * Mapcarta * Greek Travel Pages * EALO (ETAIREIA ANAPTUKsES LAKKON OMALOU) Category:Populated places in Chania (regional unit) 
