Fr. Otto Muller (English: Otto Mueller) (1870-1944) was a German Roman Catholic priest, active in the Christian Worker's movement and the German Resistance against Adolf Hitler's Nazi regime. Implicated in the July Plot, Muller died in custody in 1944. ==Biography== Muller was ordained as a Catholic priest in 1894. He became active in supporting the development of a Christian workers' movement and in 1918, became president of the West German Federation of the Catholic Workers' Movement. From 1919 to 1933 he served as a Catholic Centre Party delegate on the municipal councils in Monchengladbach and Cologne.Otto Muller; German Resistance Memorial Centre; retrieved 29 Sept. 2013 Following the Nazi takeover, the Catholic Church in Germany sought an accord with the new Government and signed the Reich concordat in effort to safeguard Church autonomy. Muller was initially convinced that the Concordat would protect Catholic Church's activities, but soon began to oppose the bishops' submissive policy toward the Nazi regime. He called on the Church to take up a clear position against the legal violations of the Nazis. Muller had been in contact with the military opposition before the beginning of World War II, and later allowed Resistance figures to use the Ketteler-Haus in Cologne for discussions.Otto Muller; German Resistance Memorial Centre; retrieved 29 Sept. 2013 Since 1927, Fr. Muller was involved in the resistance against National Socialism.http://www.gdw- berlin.de/nc/de/vertiefung/biographien/biografie/view-bio/mueller-1/ He involved himself in planning the reorganisation of post-Nazi Germany with leading Resistance figures like the Christian trade unionists Jakob Kaiser, Bernhard Letterhaus and the Blessed Nikolaus Gross, in whom the Catholic religion had motivated a determination to resist.Graml, Mommsen, Reichhardt & Wolf; The German Resistance to Hitler; B. T. Batsford Ltd; London; 1970; p.225 On 20 July 1944, the Operation Valkyrie attempt was made to assassinate Adolf Hitler, inside his Wolf's Lair field headquarters in East Prussia. The plot was the culmination of the efforts of several groups in the German Resistance to overthrow the Nazi government. The failure of both the assassination and the military coup d'etat which was planned to follow it led to the arrest of at least 7,000 people by the Gestapo.William L. Shirer; The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich; Secker & Warburg; London; 1960; p. 1393. The Gestapo arrested the Cologne conspirators. Muller, seriously ill, was imprisoned in the Berlin Police Hospital. There he died on 12 October 1944. ==See also== *Catholic Church and Nazi Germany *Kirchenkampf ==References== Category:German Roman Catholic priests Category:Roman Catholics in the German Resistance Category:German resistance members Category:Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church Category:1870 births Category:1944 deaths 
