Oye Jassie is an Indian television series, on Disney Channel India, that premiered on 13 October 2013. It is an Indian adaptation of the American Disney sitcom Jessie. It premiered with the episode "New Mumbai, New Nanny". =Plot= The series follows Jassie Singh (Tara Sutaria), a young woman from a small town with big dreams who, rebelling against her strict father, decides to leave the military base in Karnal where she grew up and moves to Mumbai. She accepts a job as a nanny and moves into a multimillion-dollar penthouse with the wealthy Malhotra family which includes jet-setting parents Rahul and Riesha Malhotra and their four rambunctious children: Ayesha, Rocky, Subbu, and Tia, along with the family pet, Shri Premchand, a seven-foot Asian water monitor lizard, that was later revealed to be a female. With a whole new world of experiences open to her, Jassie embarks on new adventures in the big city as she grows to rely on the love and support of the children in her care. Assisting her are Tony (Kenneth Desai), the family's lazy and sarcastic butler, and Lucky (Devansh Doshi), the building's 20-year-old receptionist. The series is directed by Seher Bedi ==Cast== ===Main=== *Tara Sutaria as Jaspreet "Jassie" Singhis an idealistic and resourceful girl from the military base of Karnal. As a recent high school graduate rebelling against her strict father who wanted her to join the army, Jassie moved to Mumbai to realize her dreams of stardom but, due to an unexpected turn of events, ends up becoming a nanny to the four Malhotra children. Even though at times both Jessie and the kids annoy each other, they all deeply care for one another and Jessie is even shown to be sometimes overprotective. Jassie is equivalent to Jessie Prescott played by Debby Ryan. * Mohit Bagri as Rocky Malhothra is a laid back, flirty, crafty boy who was born in West Bengal and has a passion for video games, break-dancing, and causing mischief around the penthouse while also being sarcastic at times. He considers himself a "ladies' man", having taken a liking to Jassie in particular. Rocky even tried to date her in the first few episodes. Rocky is the second oldest of the Malhotra children. He spends a lot of time with his brother, Subbu, and has a close bond with Tony as well. Rocky is equivalent to Luke Ross played by Cameron Boyce. * Ahsaas Channa as Ayesha Malhotra, is a diva, somewhat ditsy, cynical girl, eager to reorder the world to the way she sees it. Ayesha is the oldest child of the Malhotra family, and Rahul and Reisha's only biological child. She spends most of her time with Tiya and doesn't appreciate her brother Rocky. Ayesha is equivalent to Emma Ross played by Peyton List. * Diya Chalwad as Tiya Malhotra is a sassy, strong-willed, quick-witted and talkative girl. She is highly creative with a penchant for rainbows, unicorns, mermaids, and country music, and has many stuffed animals and imaginary friends. She is the youngest of the Malhotra children. She has close bonds with Jassie, Ayesha, and her imaginary friends. Tiya is equivalent to Zuri Ross played by Skai Jackson. * Ved Tarde as Subbramaniam "Subbu" Malhotra is a gentle, intelligent and courteous boy, born and raised for ten and a half years in Sri Lanka, and the newest addition of the Malhotra family. He is imbued with the culture of his beloved homeland but is thrilled with his new life in the Mumbai. He is the third oldest of the Malhotra children and also the most intelligent. He spends most of his time with Rocky but appreciates his sisters all the same. He also spends time with his lizard Shri Premchand which he brought from Sri Lanka. Subbu is equivalent to Ravi Ross played by Karan Brar. * Kenneth Desai as Tony, is the Malhotra family's butler. He is grouchy and often very lazy, though begrudgingly helps Jassie navigate her job as nanny to the four Malhotra children. He also has a passion for opera music and boy bands. Even though the Malhotra kids, as well as Jassie, get on his nerves sometimes, he deeply cares about them. Tony is equivalent to Betram played by Kevin Chamberlin. ===Recurring=== * Devansh Doshi as Lucky Luckendra Singh, Apartment Receptionist and Jassie's Boyfriend and helps her navigate her adventures in the big city. He is equivalent to Tony played by Chris Gayla. * Jhumma Mitra as Mrs. Raheja, neighbor having a crush on Tony * Simple Kaul as Reisha Malhotra, Rahul's wife, is the mother of the four Malhotra children and a former supermodel turned business magnate. She is equivalent to Christina Ross played by Christina Moore. * Harsh Vashisht as Rahul Malhotra, is the father of the four Malhotra children and a famous movie director. He is equivalent to Morgan Ross played by Charles Eston. ===Guest=== * Shilpa Dhar as Sundari and Shoma, Bad Nanny trying to exploit Jassie * Ankit Gupta as Rodney Kapoor, a young superstar starred in Rahul's film * Rajen Vyas as Ronie G * Simran Natekar as Minnie Roy * Vishal Jethwa as Vivek ==References== Category:Indian television sitcoms Category:Disney Channel (Indian TV channel) original programming Category:Television series by Disney Category:Indian television series based on American television series Category:2013 Indian television series debuts Category:2014 Indian television series endings Category:Child care occupations in television Category:Fictional nannies Category:Hindi language television sitcoms Category:Television shows set in Mumbai 
