Pablo Ocampo Street, also known simply as Ocampo Street and formerly and still referred to as Vito Cruz Street, is an inner city main road in Manila, Philippines. It runs west-east for about connecting the southern districts of Malate and San Andres southeast to Makati. Originally called Vito Cruz Street after Hermogenes Vito-Cruz, the 19th century mayor of Pineda (present-day Pasay), the street was renamed in 1989 in honor of the Filipino statesman and lawyer Pablo Ocampo. The Manila section runs from Roxas Boulevard near the Cultural Center of the Philippines (CCP) Complex heading east through the city's southern limits in Malate district. It crosses Harrison Avenue and Taft Avenue, passing beneath the Manila LRT Line 1. From there, it continues for another kilometer past the Singalong area and southwestern San Andres district toward Osmena Highway (South Luzon Expressway). Upon entering Makati east of SLEX, the road turns east at Kamagong Street where it becomes Ocampo Street Extension. It passes through the northern Makati villages of La Paz and San Antonio until it meets its eastern terminus at South Avenue west of the Manila South Cemetery. Pablo Ocampo Street is served by the Vito Cruz LRT Station along Taft Avenue and the Vito Cruz railway station along Osmena Highway. It also extends into the CCP Complex and Bay City area west of Roxas Boulevard as Pedro Bukaneg Street. ==Landmarks== Rizal Memorial Coliseum Pablo Ocampo monument beside Century Park Hotel Pablo Ocampo Street is the site of the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex with the art deco-style Rizal Memorial Baseball Stadium fronting the intersection with Adriatico Street, and the Rizal Memorial Coliseum just behind it. On the opposite corner of Adriatico is Century Park Hotel and Harrison Plaza, one of Manila's first modern shopping centers. Across the street from the plaza is the Embassy of Vietnam, Fo Guang Shan Mabuhay Temple and Orchid Garden Suites. The street also hosts the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas headquarters at the junction with Roxas Boulevard where Legaspi Towers 300 is also located. Near the intersection with Taft Avenue stand several condominium towers, such as the Cityland Vito Cruz Towers and Torre Lorenzo. The street also provides access to the De La Salle University and De La Salle-College of Saint Benilde campuses located just north of the intersection with Taft Avenue. Arellano University-School of Law is also accessible via Donada Street, a street connected to Vito Cruz. It is also the site of Saint Scholastica's College and The School of Arts and Design of the College of Saint Benilde which houses the Museum of Contemporary Art and Design. In the San Andres and San Antonio, Makati areas east of Osmena Highway, the street hosts the Rafael Palma Elementary School, Kingswood Towers, Savana Market, Shopwise Makati, and the Manila South Cemetery at its terminus. ==See also== * Major roads in Manila * List of renamed streets in Manila ==References== Category:Streets in Manila Category:Malate, Manila Category:San Andres, Manila 
