Patrice M. Regnier (born May 3, 1953) is an American choreographer,August, 1976 "Patrice Regnier and the Rush Dance Company," Dance Magazine, (New York, NY) director, producer and inventor. She is the developer of the TERP system, a patented and trademarked technology to facilitate choreographed movement without rehearsal. ==Overview== Patrice Regnier, a Minneapolis, MN native,Catherine Terwilliger, Friday, Sept. 21, 1984, "Rush job: Dance company carries message to world," Gazette Telegraph, (Colorado Springs, CO) is a graduate of Interlochen Arts Academy and the Juilliard School, where she danced with artists including Anna Sokolow and Jose Limon. In 1974, Regnier founded Rush Dance, a modern dance performance company based in New York City. Regnier lived in France between 1994 and 1997, while she cared for life partner and scientist Michel Gouilloud (ne Michel Marie Gouilloud; 1930-1997), then suffering from the late stages of Lou Gehrig's disease. Aware of the inevitable progression of his disease, the couple filmed the final years of Gouilloud's life; following his death in 1997 the documentary centered around this footage, Moving Gracefully Towards the Exit, was completed (May 2011). ==Dance== Founded in 1974 as a vessel for Regnier's choreography, Rush Dance presented regular seasons in New York at their home space series, "At Home on Broadway",Bert Wechsler (ne Charles Bertram Wechsler; 1933-1997) 1985, Music Journal, (New York, NY.) as well as touring domestically and internationally for over 20 years.Anna Kisselgoff, September 16, 1974, "Library is Setting For Rush Dancers," New York Times Domestic venues included New York's Exchange Theatre,Deborah Jowitt, December 30, 1974, "The Rush Company," Village Voice, (New York, NY) The Roundabout Theater the American Theatre Laboratory,Jennifer Dunning, March 18, 1978, "Patrice Regnier's Dancers Look at Growing Up," New York Times Pace University,Jennifer Dunning, June 5, 1979, "Dance: Sallie Wilson," New York Times Lincon Center Out of Doors,Anna Kisselgoff, September 13, 1981, "Dance: Sallie Wilson with Rush Company," New York Times Marymount Manhattan Theater,Jennie Schulman, August 13, 1982, "Rush Dance Company: A Mini Marvel," Back Stage, (New York, NY.) New York City Center,John Hennessey, May 15-31, 1983, "Rush Dance Company," East Villager, (New York, NY) and The Joyce Theater.Jennifer Dunning, March 7, 1985, "Dance: Rush Troupe," New York Times Additionally, Rush DAnce produced and performed in the 1983 Burlington Noontime Festival.Jennie Schulman, September 23, 1983, "Noontime Revels," Back Stage, (New York, NY.) Other domestic performances include the Changing Scene Theater in Denver, CO,Glenn Giffin, May 8, 1978, "Rush Dance Company Reflects Regnier Originality," Denver Post, the Joy of Movement Center in Boston,Christine Temin, April 19, 1978, "More Rush, Less Speed," Boston Evening Globe both MoMing and the Chicago Dance Center in Chicago, IL,Fred Alexson, October 13, 1978, "Rush Dance Co is far from boring," GayLife, (Chicago, IL); June 30, 1977, "What's What this Weekend," Chicago Daily News the Walnut Hill Y in Cincinnati, OH Jerry Stein, April 5, 1982, "Rush Company Displays Energy," Cincinnati Post and Dance Place in Washington, D.C.Alan M. Kriegsman, April 9, 1984 "Puns & Pinwheels at Dance Place," Washington Post, International performances included the Sophia- Antipolis Festival,July 3, 1984, "Theatre, musique, danse et folklore en pleine garrigue," Nice Matin, (Nice, France.) Paris' Theatre du Rond- Point,Francois Deletraz, July 3, 1982, "Rush: Too Intellectual," Le Quotidien de Paris the Opera House in Cologne Roger Southall, September 24, 19878, "Rush Group Offers Intense Dance," Midland Reporter-Telegram and Academie de Kuntz the in Berlin. Premiered in 1984, the ballet "R.A.B.," synthesizes Regnier's work with bodies, movement and technology. "R.A.B," the first dance performance to integrate 3-D human movement computer animation with live performance; went on to tour most notably to Chicago's Arie Crown Theater for SIGGRAPH. In 1985 the ballet was made into a film, shot by Edward Lachman and retitled R.A.B.L, and broadcast domestically on Bravo and Showtime in the United States. Regnier was awarded a double prize at the International Choreography Competition in Berlin in 1975. She has taught and presented at the St. Thomas School of Dance,September 11, 1981, "Tonight in Manhattan," Daily News, (New York, NY.) Pace University,Tobi Tobias, June 18, 1979, "Senseless," Village Voice (New York, NY) Drew University, University of Colorado, University of California, and Colorado College. ==Film== Moving Gracefully Towards the Exit, a documentary film written and directed by Regnier and Jean-Bernard Andro, was an Official Selection at the Santa Cruz Film Festival and was the winner of the Best European Independent Documentary at the European Independent Film Festival. American composer Carter Burwell (Fargo, Twilight, Being John Malkovich) created the score for the documentary. ==Technology== Regnier has helped to found many interdisciplinary organizations, including ARTeam, an association of art and technology experts and Human Development Productions, which produces film and video. Regnier acts as a creative consultant for several companies, including Interval Research Corporation, founded by Paul Allen, the co-founder of Microsoft. She has spoken on panels including the F.A.U.S.T. art and technology conference in Toulouse, France, and the 2013 Envision Symposium in Monterey, California. Regnier is currently developing the TERP system, a patented wireless multi- channel broadcast system of custom built hardware and software for composing, directing and driving human movement without rehearsal. Public TERP events are held semi-regularly in New York City. ==Collaborators== * Composer Liz Swados * Tom Brigham (Morphing inventor) * Carter Burwell, composer * Sallie Wilson, American Ballet Theatre * Steve Bray, composer * Raymond LeGue, founder: Electrogig * Bran Ferren, Applied Minds * Laurie Anderson and Joy Mountford. ==References== ; Patents and Trademarks :; Official Gazette, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office'' ; Inline citations Category:1953 births Category:Living people Category:Artists from Minneapolis Category:Juilliard School alumni Category:American choreographers 
