Paul T. Shattuck is an autism researcher at the A.J. Drexel Autism Institute at Drexel University, where he leads the Research Program Area on Life Course Outcomes.Paul Shattuck, PhD|A. J. Drexel Autism Institute|Drexel University He was previously a faculty member at the George Warren Brown School of Social Work at Washington University in St. Louis. ==Education== Dr. Shattuck obtained his PhD from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 2005, where he served as a postdoctoral fellow for two years thereafter. His education includes degrees in social work and sociology, and postdoctoral training in epidemiology. ==Career and research== While a postgraduate student at UWM, Shattuck worked on a study which concluded that some autistic children's behaviors, as they grow up, can improve with age.Study shows autism symptoms can improve into adulthood He is also well known for publishing a study in 2006 concluding that broadening of the diagnostic criteria has made a major contribution to the rise in autism rates, and for another study published three years later about the age at diagnosis of autistic children, which was later recognized as one of the most important autism studies of the year by both Autism Speaks and the Federal Interagency Autism Coordinating Committee.Paul Shattuck|Newsroom|Washington University in St. Louis Another topic of Shattuck's research is whether autistic children attend college and/or get a job after they graduate from high school. In general, his research on this topic has concluded that a much higher percentage of autistic children are unemployed after high school than children with speech or language impairments or learning disabilities. His most recent study on the topic, for example, concluded that only 53% of autistic children had ever held a paying job during the eight years following high school, the lowest rate among all disability groups. ==References== Category:Autism researchers Category:Drexel University faculty Category:Living people Category:Portland State University alumni Category:University of Massachusetts Amherst alumni Category:University of Wisconsin-Madison alumni Category:Washington University in St. Louis faculty Category:Year of birth missing (living people) 
