Pedro Gil Street (formerly Herran Street) is an east-west inner city street and a tertiary national road in south-central Manila, Philippines. It is long and spans the entire length of Ermita, Malate, Paco and Santa Ana districts, as well as portions of San Andres. The street originates at the intersection with Calderon Street fronting the Santa Ana Church in Santa Ana district where it is divided by a median of greenery and sculptures known as Plaza Felipe Calderon. Heading west, it passes through the Santa Ana Market and an SM Savemore outlet before it narrows into a four-lane undivided road west of Suter Street. Continuing past old heritage houses and a few commercial establishments, Pedro Gil crosses into the northern portion of San Andres and Paco district where it is interrupted by the Paco railway station and busy Quirino Avenue. The downtown portion of Paco, as well as Ermita and Malate, lie across this intersection passing through the Paco Church, Robinsons Place Manila shopping mall, and universities such as University of the Philippines Manila and Saint Paul University Manila. The Ermita-Malate portion in which the street serves as boundary also contains several hotels like the New World Manila Bay Hotel (formerly Hyatt Hotel & Casino Manila). Roxas Boulevard lies at its western end. The street is served by the LRT-1 Pedro Gil Station along Taft Avenue and the Paco railway station along Quirino Avenue. It also continues towards the eastern Metro Manila cities of Mandaluyong and San Juan across the Pasig River as New Panaderos and General Kalentong Streets. The street was named after Pedro Gil, a Filipino legislator of the early 1920s. It was originally known as Herran Street, after Jose de la Herran, a Spanish captain during the Battle of Manila Bay.Did you know? Pedro Gil Street published by Philippine Daily Inquirer; accessed 2013-10-07. ==Intersections== ==Landmarks== Plaza Felipe Calderon is located in the landscaped median just east of Tejeron Street in Santa Ana Pedro Gil Street is home to a number educational institutions, such as the University of the Philippines Manila, Saint Paul University Manila and Philippine Christian University in Ermita, the Colegio de la Inmaculada Concepcion de la Concordia, Paco Catholic School, and Fernando Maria Guerrero Elementary School in Paco, and OB Montessori Center in Santa Ana. It is also the location of Robinsons Place Manila shopping mall, New World Manila Bay Hotel and Casino, and Hotel Kimberly in the tourist zone just east of Roxas Boulevard. The street also provides access to the San Fernando de Dilao Church (Paco Church) and Paraiso ng Batang Maynila community park, as well as the Nuestra Senora de los Desamparados Church (Santa Ana Church) and Plaza Felipe Calderon located at the street's eastern end. Santa Ana Public Market and Paco Market are the biggest wholesale markets located on Pedro Gil Street. It is served by Pedro Gil station on Taft Avenue and Paco station at its intersection with Quirino Avenue. The Santa Ana Ferry Terminal is also located near the Santa Ana Church. ==See also== * Major roads in Manila * List of renamed streets in Manila ==References== Category:Streets in Manila Category:Ermita Category:Malate, Manila Category:Paco, Manila Category:Santa Ana, Manila 
