The plan of salvation is a Christian concept regarding God's plan to save humanity from sin and its consequences. It occurs first in the New Testament, for example in the Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Mark, although some scholars consider the idea fully developed first in the Gospel of Luke.TWNT Pe-R - Page 688 1968 "Zeit (1954), 81 f., 112f., 116, 128-133 etc. thinks the idea of a plan of salvation is peculiar to Lk. and is not much developed in the earlier Gospels. It is worth noting that the itp6 of the Lucan passages finds no counterpart in the other Synoptists. Yet the concept of a plan of salvation occurs both in Mt. and Mk., e.g., Mt. 8:29 (-r lines 22 ff.); Mk. 14:41." According to some writers, this plan of salvation is equivalent to the idea of a divine economy in history. This idea is developed by Ignatius,Paul Tillich - A history of Christian thought - 1968 - Page 21 "Ignatius in particular develops this idea of a plan of salvation. In his letter to the Ephesians he speaks of the "economy towards the new man". This is a wonderful summary of the Christian message. Economy here means "building a house"." AugustineAloys Grillmeier Christ in Christian Tradition: From the Apostolic Age to ...- 1975 - Page 100 "Through the express subordination of this typology to the idea of a plan of salvation, however, his work takes on a special character in comparison with that of his exemplar."Saint Augustine (Bishop of Hippo.), On Genesis -John E. Rotelle 2002 Page 20 "The idea of a plan of salvation that began with the very act of creation made way for a metaphysical meditation on the being and order of creation. and Johann Albrecht Bengel.Klaus Vondung The Apocalypse in Germany 2000- Page 43 "There remained by them"--and now Lessing appears to take up Bengel's concept of a plan of salvation, of a "divine economy" in history--"similarity of the economy of the same God. Ever, to let them speak my words, ever the self-same plan of ... ==References== Category:Christian soteriology 
