Politisk Revy (meaning Political Review in English) was a Danish bi-weekly political magazine with new left tendency. The magazine was named after the 1920s critical magazine, Critical Revue. Politisk Revy existed between 1963 and 1987. ==History== Politisk Revy, a bi-weekly magazine, was founded in 1963 by Andreas Jorgensen, a left-wing politician. The other cofounders of the magazine were Socialist People's Party members and journalists who had worked for defunct Dialogue magazine. Politisk Revy was based in Copenhagen and was published by Kobenhavn. The early the editors of the magazine included Andreas Jorgensen, Johan Fjord Jensen, Ulf Christiansen and Sven Skovmand who left the magazine after 1966. Ebbe Klovedal Reich and Ole Grunbaum were two of its columnists following this period. The former also served as editor of the bi- weekly for one year at the end of the 1960s. Karen Jespersen, former interior minister of Denmark, served as the editor of Politisk Revy from 1974 to 1977. Bente Hansen is also among the former editors-in-chief of the magazine. Politisk Revy reached its peak circulation in the 1970s with 5,000 copies. During this period the magazine was one of the alternative media together with Information, a newspaper, in Denmark. The magazine was closed in March 1987 due to low levels of circulation and shaky finances. In 1969 the magazine also began to publish books of which number was 507 until its disestablishment. ==Political leaning and censorship== Politisk Ravy was not affiliated to any political party or organization. However, in the late 1960s the magazine functioned as a forum for the new left in Denmark. In addition, people adopted the views of the new left in the country were organized around the magazine. The magazine provided a very theoretical approach towards the leftist ideas. From 1966 the magazine began to publish articles about the role of Cuba as a driving force in Third World revolutionary activities. Ebbe Klovedal Reich's editorials in the magazine were mostly about the criticism of the Vietnam war. In 1969, the Danish police seized the magazine's forthcoming issue for allegedly containing secret military information. The magazine published an editorial in Autumn 1970, arguing that Greenland should have a socialist government. ==See also== List of magazines in Denmark ==References== Category:1963 establishments in Denmark Category:1987 disestablishments in Denmark Category:Biweekly magazines Category:Danish-language magazines Category:Defunct magazines published in Denmark Category:Defunct political magazines Category:Magazines established in 1963 Category:Magazines disestablished in 1987 Category:Magazines published in Copenhagen Category:Political magazines published in Denmark Category:Socialist magazines 
