Pranas Talzunas (born as Frank Konstant Talzunas; May 23, 1913 in Chicago - ?)Illinois, Cook County Birth Certificates, 1878-1922, FamilySearch. was a Lithuanian American basketball player. He won a gold medal with the Lithuania national basketball team during the EuroBasket 1937, held in Riga. Pranas was named MVP of EuroBasket 1937 and is regarded as the first player to use the hook shot. Talzunas attitude toward the game, the matches and the representing of the nation seriousness are perfectly described by his words after the successful competition ending: "I confess that going to Riga I had no clue what to thought: whenever we will win or not. I didn't knew how our upcoming opponents plays. <...> We won deservedly, however <...> it wasn't easy. <...> The concern of the upcoming battles for me and for Feliksas Kriauciunas didn't let us to sleep for any single night. <...> We were considering the victories possibilities for hours and still doubted it. Now everything is over. For me the heaviest stone just fall from the chest".Stanislovas Stonkus "Krepsinio kelias i Lietuva" (page: 27) ==Player profile== Pranas Talzunas, holding the trophy (sixth from the left) Pranas Talzunas game-play was perfectly described by the sport journalist Juozas Kusa: "Talzunas doesn't like to shoot from far, he scores all the points from under the basket. <...> It is his specialty and that his ability was overshadowed rarely by defender at least once. Just look - he got the ball, discreetly turned around, the defender is left at the other side, the, most frequently, right hand rises and the basket is done. He is also capable to shoot from far: he shot only once versus Italy and implanted it".Stanislovas Stonkus "Krepsinio kelias i Lietuva" (page: 28) Juris Silarajs, a Latvia national team member in 1939, who vigilantly spectated the second European championship, described him by saying: "P. Talzunas wasn't very tall, possibly 182-183 centimeters, however he was a tightly structured athlete. <...> The whole Lithuania national team game was based on P. Talzunas. <...> The attack was started by F. Kriauciunas, then the ball was reaching Zukas and he was passing it to the P. Talzunas, who was finishing the attack. We saw a new way to shoot into the basket: by having the ball, standing at his back to the basket, P. Talzunas was jumping by turning into the basket and was sending the ball to the basket with his both hands". Olgert Altberg, the famous Latvian basketball coach, theoretician and professor, described Talzunas by telling: "P. Talzunas has shown the shot over the head for the first time - a hook shot. Nobody saw such shooting way before". From the Latvian press of that time: "Talzunas, as attacker, was receiving at least half of the points, which the Lithuanian team was scoring. He is irreplaceable in his activity under the basket. The Italy, Poland, Estonia and Egypt defenders were vainly trying to detain this famous Lithuanian player, who was the best attacker".Stanislovas Stonkus "Krepsinio kelias i Lietuva" (page: 29) ==References== ==External links== *Phil Hersh, Lithuania Stands Tall In Basketball, in <<Chicago Tribune>>, June 21, 1992. Category:1913 births Category:Year of death missing Category:American people of Lithuanian descent Category:FIBA EuroBasket-winning players Category:Lithuanian men's basketball players Category:Sportspeople from Chicago 
