Pratyekabuddhayana (Sanskrit; ) is a Buddhist term for the path, or vehicle, of a pratyekabuddha ("solitary awakened one", prati- each, eka-one, buddha- enlightened). This term was used in Indian Buddhism by early Buddhist schools, and is also used by the Mahayana tradition. ==In early Buddhist schools== At least some of the early Buddhist schools used the concept of three vehicles including Pratyekabuddhayana. For example, the Vaibhasika Sarvastivadins are known to have employed the outlook of Buddhist practice as consisting of the Three Vehicles:Nakamura, Hajime. Indian Buddhism: A Survey With Bibliographical Notes. 1999. p. 189 # Sravakayana # Pratyekabuddhayana # Bodhisattvayana The Dharmaguptakas regarded the path of a pratyekabuddha (pratyekabuddhayana) and the path of a bodhisattva (bodhisattvayana) to be separate. One of their tenets reads, "The Buddha and those of the Two Vehicles, although they have one and the same liberation, have followed different noble paths."<<Yi Bu Zong Lun Lun Shu Ji >> :Wei Fo Sui Zai Seng Zhong Suo She ,Ran Bie Shi Fo Guo Da ,Fei Seng (Guo Da ). Yu Su Du Bo Xing Gong Yang Ye Huo Guang Da Guo . Fo Yu Er Cheng Jie Tuo Sui Yi ,Er Sheng Dao Yi . Wu Zhu Wai Dao Neng De Wu Tong . A Luo Han Shen Jie Shi Wu Lou . Yu Yi Duo Tong Da Zhong Bu Zhi .  ==In Mahayana teachings== In the 4th century Mahayana abhidharma work Abhidharmasamuccaya, Asanga describes those who follow the Sravaka Vehicle (Skt. sravakayanika). These people are described as having weak faculties, following the Sravaka Dharma, utilizing the Sravaka Pitaka, being set on their own liberation, and cultivating detachment in order to attain liberation.Boin- Webb, Sara (tr). Rahula, Walpola (tr). Asanga. Abhidharma Samuccaya: The Compendium of Higher Teaching. 2001. p. 199-200 While those in the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle (Skt. pratyekabuddhayanika) are portrayed as also utilizing the Sravaka Pitaka, they are said to have medium faculties, to follow the Pratyekabuddha Dharma, and to be set on their own personal enlightenment. Finally, those in the Mahayana (Skt. mahayanika) are portrayed as utilizing the Bodhisattva Pitaka, as having sharp faculties, following the Bodhisattva Dharma, and set on the perfection and liberation of all beings, and the attainment of complete enlightenment. ==Notes== Category:Pratyekabuddhas Category:Mahayana Buddhist terminology 
