The Temporary representation of the former United Internal Revolutionary Organization (Bulgarian:Vremenno predstavitelstvo na bivshata Obedinena V'treshna Revoliutsionna Organizatsiia) was a short-lasted organization founded by former members of the Internal Macedonian-Adrianople Revolutionary Organization, created in 1919 on the wake of the Paris Peace Conference after the World War I in Sofia.Historical Dictionary of the Republic of Macedonia, Dimitar Bechev, Scarecrow Press, 2009, , p. 84. The left wing of IMARO, disturbed by the organization's increasing domination by the pro-Greater Bulgaria Vrhovists, founded this Organization, aimed to avoid the partitition of the region of Macedonia. It included Gyorche Petrov, Dimo Hadzhidimov, Petar Atsev, Hristo Tatartchev, Petar Pop Arsov, Mihail Gerdzhikov etc. The Organization issued a memorandum and send it to the representatives of the Great Powers on the Peace conference in Paris. There the Temporary representation advocated for autonomy of Macedonia as a part of a future Balkan Federation. It threatened the autonomous Macedonia as state populated by different people as Bulgarians, Greeks, Serbs, Turks, Vlahs, etc. In the parliamentary and local elections of 1919, the Temporary representation supported the candidates of the Bulgarian Communist Party. The BCP sought to take the Organization over, in fact to transform it into its own section. Following the signing of the Treaty of Neuilly and the partition of Macedonia, the activity of the Temporary representation faded. In 1920 it was dissolved and most from its members joined the Bulgarian Emigrant Communist Union.Macedonia and the Macedonians: a history, Andrew Rossos, Hoover Press, 2008 , Chapter 10. Other members joined a number of different leftist organizations. They all were opposed to the restoration of IMARO as a Bulgarian nationalist organization under the name IMRO, headed by Todor Alexandrov. Subsequently, most of them were killed in the strife among the Macedonian revolutionaries. At least until the middle of the 1920s, the former IMRO-left was not a united movement, unlike the right wing. In 1925 the most of its survivors joined the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (United). ==Notes== ==Sources== * Grebenarov, Aleksand'r, Legalni i taini organizatsii na makedonskite bezhantsi v B'lgariia (1918-1947), MNI, Sofiia, 2006 g.,470 s. * The Communist party of Bulgaria: origins and development, 1883-1936, Joseph Rothschild, AMS Press, 1972, , p. 117\. * ,,Natsionalnoosvoboditelnata borba v Makedoniia, 1919 - 1941 g.", Kolektiv, Makedonski Nauchen Institut. ==See also== *Foreign Representation of the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization Category:Modern history of Macedonia (region) Category:Bulgarian revolutionary organisations Category:1919 establishments in Bulgaria Category:Organizations established in 1919 Category:Defunct organizations based in Bulgaria Category:Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization Category:Organizations based in Sofia 
