Ramon O'Callaghan (born c. 1953) is a Spanish organizational theorist, Emeritus Professor of Information Systems and Innovation Management at the Tilburg University, and Dean of Porto Business School, the business school of the University of Porto in Porto, Portugal. He is particularly known for his work on Electronic Data Interchange.Bharadwaj, Sundar G., P. Rajan Varadarajan, and John Fahy. "Sustainable competitive advantage in service industries: a conceptual model and research propositions." The Journal of Marketing (1993): 83-99.Iacovou, Charalambos L., Izak Benbasat, and Albert S. Dexter. "Electronic data interchange and small organizations: adoption and impact of technology." MIS Quarterly (1995): 465-485. == Biography == O'Callaghan received his Engineer's degree from the Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya in 1976, his MBA in 1983 at the IESE Business School, and his Doctor of Business Administration from Harvard Business School in 1989.Ramon O'Callaghan Nazarbayev University O'Callaghan started his academic career as researcher at the Cybernetics Institute of the Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya in 1976. From 1977 to 1989 he spend most time in industry with Texas Instruments as sales engineer and project manager; at Codorniu Winery as controller; at Harvard Business School as researcher; and at the management consulting firm Institut Cerda as director. Back in Spain in 1989 he became Associate Professor at the IESE Business School. In 1994 he moved to the Netherlands to the Nyenrode Business Universiteit, where he became Director of the MBA program. From 1997 to 2013 he was appointed Professor of Information Systems at the Tilburg University. There he also directed the MBA program, and the Master Program for some years, and was Dean of the TIAS School for Business and Society from 2009 to 2012 as successor of Philippe Naert. He was also associated with the Open University of Catalonia and the Universidad de Deusto. Since 2013 he is Dean of the Graduate School of Business of the Nazarbayev University. ==Selected publications== O'Callaghan has published numerous articles in the field of strategic management of technology. Books, a selection: * 1995, EDI in Europe : how it works in practice. With Helmut Krcmar and Niels Bjorn-Andersen. Chichester ; New York : Wiley. * 2005. Transforming enterprise : the economic and social implications of information technology. With William H. Dutton, Brian Kahin, and Andrew W. Wyckoff (eds). Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press. Articles, a selection: * O'Callaghan, Ramon, Patrick J. Kaufmann, and Benn R. Konsynski. "Adoption correlates and share effects of electronic data interchange systems in marketing channels." The Journal of Marketing (1992): 45-56. * O'Callaghan, Ramon, and Jon A. Turner. "Electronic Data Interchange Concepts and Issues." (1995). * Peterson, Ryan R., Ramon O'Callaghan, and Piet Ribbers. "Information technology governance by design: investigating hybrid configurations and integration mechanisms." Proceedings of the twenty first international conference on Information systems. Association for Information Systems, 2000. == References == == External links == * Ramon O'Callaghan Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:Living people Category:Spanish engineers Category:Spanish business theorists Category:University of Navarra alumni Category:Harvard Business School alumni Category:University of Navarra faculty Category:Nyenrode Business University faculty Category:Tilburg University faculty 
