Reema Harrysingh-Carmona (born 22 November 1970 in Hoboken, New Jersey, United States) is a Trinidad and Tobago economist who has served as the First Lady of Trinidad and Tobago since 2013 until 2018. She is the wife of the fifth President of the Republic, Anthony Carmona. ==Early life== Reema Harrysingh Carmona was born in Hoboken, New Jersey. Her father, the late Cobee Harrysingh was a retired engineering contractor and her mother is Savitri Seeteram- Harrysingh. She is the daughter of Indo-Trinidadian parents, and attended St. Brigid's Girls' R.C. and Iere High School, both in Siparia, Trinidad and Tobago. After graduating with nine Ordinary Level passes from the Caribbean Examinations Council, she migrated to Canada where she attended Cairine Wilson High School, Ottawa and subsequently the University of Ottawa, from which she obtained a degree of Bachelor of Science in Economics. She and President Carmona are parents to two children, Christian (b. 1999) and Anura (b. 2002). Her religious affiliation is Sanatani Hinduism, although her husband President Anthony Carmona is a Roman Catholic Christian of Cocoa panyol descent. Harrysingh-Carmona lived in the United States and Canada before relocating to Trinidad. ==Career== After 11 years in Canada, Harrysingh-Carmona returned to Trinidad and Tobago, where she worked both at the Point Lisas Industrial Port Development Corporation (PLIPDECO) and the Small Business Development Corporation. ==First Lady== Harrysingh-Carmona is the wife of His Excellency Anthony Carmona, fifth president of The Republic of Trinidad and Tobago. They got married at the La Davina Pastora Catholic Church in south Trinidad in 1997. Her social work includes support for the Diabetes Association, Children Obesity prevention, and Autism Awareness among others. ==References== Category:1970 births Category:Living people Category:American emigrants to Trinidad and Tobago Category:First Ladies of Trinidad and Tobago Category:Hindavi people Category:People from Hoboken, New Jersey Category:Trinidad and Tobago economists Category:Trinidad and Tobago women in politics 
