Robert D. Manfred Jr. (born September 28, 1958) is an American lawyer and business executive who is the tenth and current Commissioner of Major League Baseball. He previously served as the Chief Operating Officer of Major League Baseball (MLB) and succeeded Bud Selig as Commissioner on January 25, 2015. ==Early life and career== Manfred was born on September 28, 1958, in Rome, New York. He attended Rome Free Academy and graduated in 1976. Manfred enrolled at Le Moyne College from 1976 through 1978 before transferring to Cornell University. He received his B.S. degree from Cornell's School of Industrial and Labor Relations and his J.D. degree from Harvard Law School. After law school, he clerked for Judge Joseph L. Tauro of the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts. He became a partner at Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, focusing on labor and employment law. ==Major League Baseball== In 1987, Manfred began working with Major League Baseball (MLB) during collective bargaining. During the 1994-95 MLB strike, he served as outside counsel for the owners. He joined MLB on a full-time basis in 1998, serving as the Executive Vice President of Economics and League Affairs. Manfred negotiated MLB's first drug testing agreement with the Major League Baseball Players Association (MLBPA) in 2002, and represented MLB in negotiations with the MLBPA when forming new collective bargaining agreements in 2002, 2006 and 2011. In 2013, Manfred led MLB's investigation of the Biogenesis scandal. Manfred at the 2015 Major League Baseball All-Star Game At the end of the 2013 season, Commissioner of Baseball Bud Selig promoted Manfred to chief operating officer of MLB. The position had been vacant since Bob DuPuy resigned in 2010. Following the announcement of Selig's retirement, effective after the 2014 season, Manfred became a finalist to succeed him as Commissioner. On August 14, 2014, MLB owners elected Manfred to succeed Selig, beating Boston Red Sox chairman Tom Werner and MLB executive vice president of business Tim Brosnan. Manfred assumed office on January 25, 2015. He stated that his primary goals as commissioner were youth outreach, embracing technology, quickening the pace of play, strengthening player relations, and creating a more unified business operation. As commissioner, Manfred instituted rules before the start of the 2015 season to address the pace of play, including having batters remain in the batter's box and the installation of time clocks to limit the time spent around commercial breaks. Before the 2018 season, Manfred introduced more rule changes to affect the pace of play, including reducing the time in commercial breaks and limiting player visits to the pitcher's mound. He has also advocated for expansion franchises, listing Portland, Las Vegas, Charlotte, Nashville, Montreal, and Vancouver as possible locations for new teams. On November 15, 2018, the owners extended Manfred's contract through the 2024 season. ==Personal life== Growing up in Upstate New York, Manfred was a fan of the New York Yankees. His father led the Rome, New York, division of Revere Copper and Brass, while his mother was a schoolteacher. He has an older sister and a younger brother. Manfred and his wife, Colleen have four children; Megan, Michael, Jane and Mary Clare. Megan married Timothy Petrella of Minnetonka, Minnesota, son of the president of UnitedHealthcare Community and State, at Immaculate Conception Catholic Church in Sleepy Hollow, New York. and Michael married Ashley Allen at Catholic Church of the Transfiguration in Tarrytown, New York. Manfred serves as a Board member at Catholic School of Holy Child in Rye, New York. ==References== ==External links== * Category:Living people Category:1958 births Category:American Roman Catholics Category:Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor Relations alumni Category:Harvard Law School alumni Category:Major League Baseball commissioners Category:Place of birth missing (living people) Category:Lawyers from Philadelphia Category:People from Rome, New York Category:American chief operating officers Category:Catholics from New York (state) 
