UWC Robert Bosch College is among the newest members of the United World Colleges (UWC) movement, one of eighteen colleges around the world, having started accepting students in September 2014. The mission of the UWC movement and of the school is to "make education a force to unite people, nations and cultures for peace and a sustainable future". The college follows the International Baccalaureate (IB) curriculum, covering the two final years of high school and admits 200 students in total, 100 per year-group. 50 places are awarded to German students and 150 places to students from other nations. The international student body currently consists of 90 nationalities and representatives of all major world religions as well as of a wide range of socio-economic backgrounds. Student body is divided into first years and second years. Students are selected by over 140 national committees worldwide, who review the applications and invite students for interviews and / or selection weekends. Thanks to a wide network of sponsors and supporters and a need-based scholarship program, the national committees can select students irrespective of the financial situation of their parents. At UWC Robert Bosch College, over 70% of the students receive a full scholarship, while the rest are on partial scholarships or self-funded. The college's fully residential campus is located on the newly refurbished Freiburg Charterhouse, a former Carthusian monastery dating to the 14th century. The students are housed in newly built and cube-shaped student houses, which were designed by architect Peter Kulka and follow Freiburg's energy-efficient standards. The houses are sustainable and are powered by energy from solar panels. The student village consists of eight houses for students and four houses for teachers. The student houses house around 24 people. All houses are equipped with: a kitchen with common supplies, living room with tables, 4 bathrooms and a storage room. The school is named after German industrialist Robert Bosch, founder of the Robert Bosch GmbH. The company and the Robert Bosch Stiftung foundation contributed around 45 million Euros to the project. Together with Deutsche Stiftung UWC, the Robert Bosch Stiftung is a big shareholder of the school. Additional significant support comes from Land Baden-Wurttemberg, B. Braun Melsungen AG, Stadt Freiburg, Adelhausenstiftung Freiburg, the Eugen-Martin- Stiftung as well as many other individual sponsors. The school "places a particular emphasis on environmental issues. A key question will be how technology can contribute to sustainable, ecological development and peace". == References == == External links == * Official Site * United World College Deutschland Website * UWC Robert Bosch College Facebook page * UWC Robert Bosch College Instagram page * UWC Robert Bosch College YouTube channel Category:Schools in Freiburg im Breisgau Category:United World Colleges Category:Private schools in Germany Category:High schools in Germany Category:Boarding schools in Germany Category:International Baccalaureate schools in Germany Category:Educational institutions established in 2012 
