Roger Gouin (born July 15, 1950) is a Canadian businessman and philanthropist who with his brother, Martin Paul Gouin, own Norama Inc., a private investment firm located in Edmonton, Alberta. Prior to Norama, Roger and Martin owned and operated North American Construction Group (NACG.),"NACG History". Congruity Group. with divisions that included mining, heavy construction, industrial services, piling, pipelines and real estate. In 2003, NACG was sold to a Texas-based investment group, who in 2006 took the company public on the New York Stock Exchange."History and Development of the Company". North American Energy Partners. June 26, 2009 ==Career== As a teenager, beginning in 1966, Roger's summers were spent learning about construction as a labourer, on the business end of a shovel, graduating to tractors and bulldozers. In 1971, he began a career with his father's company,"Jean Ivan Gouin". Jean Ivan Gouin Biography North American Road, later becoming North American Construction Group (NACG). In 1980, Roger and his brother Martin Gouin, purchased North American Road and North American Construction Group from their father and began and long and successful partnership as they expanded and re-engineered what began as a road building business, into one of Canada's largest privately held construction groups with operations that included, mining, heavy construction, industrial services, piling, pipelining and real estate. With sale of NACG in 2003"NACG Purchase Agreement". U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Roger turned to Norama Inc and its private investment portfolio, where currently he and Martin continue to manage their affairs. In 2012, Roger, his brother Martin and their father Ivan Gouin (posthumously) were inducted into the Alberta Business Hall of Fame."Roger and Martin Gouin Alberta Business Hall of Fame Profile" . Alberta Business Hall of Fame, 2012 ==Personal life== In 1971, Roger married his high school sweetheart, Peggy (nee Dubensky) Gouin QC,Gouin credentials". Canadian Lawyers List."Peggy Gouin QC designation". Alberta Courts. a practicing lawyer in Edmonton, Alberta. They have two daughters, Renee and Arden."Jean Yvon (Ivan) Gouin: Obituary". National Post. November 11, 2007. His sister Renee is married to Canadian billionaire and Edmonton Oilers owner, Daryl Katz.McConnell, Rick; MacKinnon, John; Lamphier, Gary (December 17, 2012). "Daryl Katz: reclusive billionaire" . Edmonton Journal. ==Philanthropy== Roger Gouin is the co-Chair of the Alumni of University Hospital Foundation and is actively involved in raising funds for, and supporting a broad range of community causes, including: the United Way,"A Place to Cal Home - Roger's involvement noted on document page 6". Edmonton's 10 Year Plan to End Homelessness. the Cross Cancer Institute, the Alberta Cancer Foundation and the University of Alberta. In 2005, he received the Audrey Greenough Award of Merit from the University Hospital Foundation."The Audrey Greenough Award". University Hospital Foundation. Roger has been a member of many boards, including the University Hospital Foundation, the Mental Health Foundation, the Edmonton Petroleum Club, Royal Mayfair Golf and Country Club and the Art Gallery of Alberta."Involvement with the Alberta Art Gallery". Alberta Art Gallery 2011 Donors List."Involvement with the Alberta Art Gallery". Alberta Art Gallery 2012 Donors List. He also co-chaired the Edmonton Homeless Commission"A Place to Cal Home - Executive Summary". Edmonton's 10 Year Plan to End Homelessness. and was active in the Young Presidents' Organization, World Presidents' Organization, the Prairie Road Builders' Association as well as the Canadian Construction Association. ==References== ==External links== *Alberta Business Hall of Fame: 2012 / Ivan, Roger & Martin Gouin * * Category:1950 births Category:Living people Category:Businesspeople from Edmonton Category:Canadian construction businesspeople Category:Canadian investors Category:Canadian people of Slovenian descent Category:Canadian philanthropists 
