Ruben Belima Rodriguez (born 11 February 1992) is a Spanish-born Equatorial Guinean footballer who plays as a left winger for the Equatorial Guinea national team. ==Club career== Belima was born in Mostoles, Community of Madrid, Spain. He began his career with FC Torrevieja before joining the youth ranks of Real Madrid, and making his way into their C-team. He made his professional debut with the reserve team in Segunda Division on 4 May 2014, as an 85th-minute substitute for Burgui in a 1-1 home draw with fellow strugglers Real Jaen CF. After 18 months in Slovenia with FC Koper, Belima returned to the Iberian Peninsula on 31 July 2017, signing for Leixoes S.C. of Portugal's LigaPro for one year with the option of a second. He scored four times in 24 games for the club from Matosinhos - including the only one of a home victory over F.C. Pacos de Ferreira in the Taca da Liga groups on 20 September - before making the journey back to the previous country to NK Domzale. On 28 January 2019 Belima was back in Portugal's second tier, with G.D. Estoril Praia. He scored once in the remainder of the season, albeit in the 4-2 loss at F.C. Penafiel that ended the team's hope of promotion to the Primeira Liga. ==International career== Belima made his international debut for Equatorial Guinea on 16 November 2013 in a friendly against his birth country Spain in Malabo; he was a last-minute substitute for Juvenal Edjogo-Owono in the 2-1 loss. The game was however stricken from the FIFA records as the host team had not given sufficient notice that the referee would be a compatriot. Equatorial Guinea were given the hosting rights to the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations when Morocco withdrew due to the Ebola virus epidemic, and Belima was named in their squad. He was a substitute in the opening match against the Congo and the quarter-final, before starting the semi-final and play-off as the team came fourth. ==References== ==External links== * * Category:1992 births Category:Living people Category:People from Mostoles Category:Citizens of Equatorial Guinea through descent Category:Spanish footballers Category:Madrilenian footballers Category:Equatoguinean footballers Category:Association football wingers Category:Tercera Division players Category:Segunda Division B players Category:Segunda Division players Category:Slovenian PrvaLiga players Category:LigaPro players Category:CD Torrevieja players Category:Real Madrid C footballers Category:Real Madrid Castilla footballers Category:FC Koper players Category:Leixoes S.C. players Category:NK Domzale players Category:G.D. Estoril Praia players Category:Equatorial Guinea international footballers Category:2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Category:Equatoguinean expatriate footballers Category:Expatriate footballers in Slovenia Category:Equatoguinean expatriate sportspeople in Portugal Category:Expatriate footballers in Portugal Category:Equatoguinean people of Spanish descent Category:Spanish expatriate footballers Category:Spanish expatriate sportspeople in Slovenia Category:Spanish expatriate sportspeople in Portugal Category:Spanish people of Equatoguinean descent Category:Equatoguinean expatriate sportspeople in Slovenia 
