Rui Goncalves da Camara (c. 1430 - 27 November 1497), was the second son of Joao Goncalves Zarco, and inherited the title of Donatary-Captain of the island of Sao Miguel in the Portuguese archipelago of the Azores. Rui Goncalves da Camara was made the third person to administer/manage the colonization of the island of Sao Miguel by regal charter on 10 March 1474 (becoming the first of the family Goncalves da Camara to obtain this title). After his 21-year mandate to administer the island of Sao Miguel, in which he was successful in promoting and establishing settlements throughout the colony, the Vila Franca do Campo received a foral (charter) as town. ==Biography== ===Early life=== Rui Goncalves da Camara was the son of Joao Goncalves Zarco, one of the men identified in the discovery of the archipelago of Madeira.Carlos Melo Bento (2008), p.23 Rui da Camara married Maria de Bettencourt. Rui Goncalves became a squire in the House of D. Ferdinand, Duke of Viseu, and was favoured and confided by the Prince.Susana Goulart Costa (2008), p.237 ===Captaincy=== Until 1474, the island of Sao Miguel was part of a larger fiefdom bequeathed to Joao Soares de Albergaria, the Captaincy of Santa Maria and Sao Miguel.Carlos Melo Bento (2008), p.22 At that time, the island was a large, underpopulated and, therefore, unproductive possession of the Donatario Diogo, Duke of Viseu, nephew of King Edward: the Duke approved its transfer to Rui da Camara, as his Captain on the island of Sao Miguel, during a period when Joao Soares de Albergaria was more preoccupied with the health of his wife, and looked to the sale as a way of improving his finances. Albergaria had decided to sell his concession while staying with their family on Madeira. With broad physique and great intelligence, he occupied most of his administration with the establishment and settlement of his Capitania. Rui da Camara was an imposing figure on his horse, wearing fur bonnet and large overcoat; he was unafraid to visit his fiefdom along without scribes, servants or soldiers. Apart from his small workforce that tended to his possessions, Rui da Camara offered lands to settlers who were obligated to transform the uncultivated lands within a five-year contract. Those were unable to fulfill the contract would forfeit their lands to another, who were under the same obligations. It was through these conditions that the island was rapidly populated. Around the 16th century, the first cyclical agricultural activities began to appear, when colonists began to cultivate Lupin beans when the land was fallow, to improve the following seasons crop. At the time wheat, sugar, potatoes and flax seeds were the primary crops, while herding cattle, fishing, hunting of wild game supported the smaller settlements. At the same time, introduced by the Fleming Josse van Huerter on Faial, the woad industry began to appear on the other islands. Governing since 1504, Rui da Camara would outlive his mother (D. Ines) and his siblings whom disappeared in the shipwreck of their caravel on their return to Lisbon.Carlos Melo Bento (2008), p.33 Eighteen years later, during the early morning, Vila Franca was destroyed resulting the death of many and forcing the move of the provincial capital to Ponta Delgada. For a while, though, he and his wife settled in the region of Caloura, in the Vale da Cabecas near the hermitage dedicated to Nossa Senhora das Dores During his time with the sisters in the secluded valley Camara resolved to assist in obtaining a papel bull to build a convent for the nuns, eventually resulting in creation of the Convent of Santo Andre. The Captain- Donatario eventually established his residence in the buildings near the Church of Sao Pedro in Ponta Delgada, before taking-up residence along the Rua do Conde, given in honour of the Camara family, who were made counts during the reign of Phillip II.Carlos Melo Bento (2008), p.34 ===Later life=== Yet, Rui da Camara continued his governorship in the shadow of the fortress of Sao Bras, where he and his wife, were responsible for arming and fortifying the defenses against Castilian forces.Carlos Melo Bento (2008), p.25 He exercised this role until his death (during the reign of Emmanuel of Portugal), where he was buried, alongside his wife, in the main chapel of the historic Church of Sao Miguel (ordered constructed by the Prince). At the time of his death Rui Goncalves this nobleman left no heirs, and contrary to the laws of inheritance, on 10 March 1474, D. Diogo authorized the bestowal of the Captaincy to this Captain's illegitimate sons. ==References== ===Notes=== ===Sources=== * Camara Rui Goncalves 1 Category:1430 births Category:1497 deaths Category:15th-century Portuguese people 
