Logo, Safe-in-Sound Excellence in Hearing Loss Prevention Award The Safe-in- Sound Excellence in Hearing Loss Prevention Award is an occupational health and safety award that was established in 2007 through a partnership between the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and the National Hearing Conservation Association (NHCA). In 2018, the partnership was extended to include the Council for Accreditation in Occupational Hearing Conservation (CAOHC). This award recognizes organizations that demonstrate measurable achievements towards noise control and hearing loss prevention in the workplace. Noise-induced hearing loss is a prevalent work related illness and case studies show that substantial reductions in noise levels in the workplace can be achieved. However, there is very little evidence to show that implementation of stricter legislation can reduce noise levels in workplaces. This award disseminates information of effective practices to a broader occupational safety and health community to encourage the adoption of evidence based hearing loss prevention.Meinke D, Morata T, Hayden C. Noise Control Strategies: Lessons from Safe-in-Sound Excellence in Hearing Loss Prevention Awards(tm) Proceedings of the NOISE-CON 2013, 2013 August 26-28 Denver, Colorado The winner, chosen by an expert committee, must incorporate evidence of effectiveness and familiar benchmarks of hearing loss prevention. The focus of this effort is documenting and highlighting effective interventions for the prevention of the negative effects of noise exposure and not regulatory compliance. Award presented, with name of the winner engraved. Winners also receive support to attend the Annual Hearing Conservation Conference, hosted by the National Hearing Conservation Association. The Safe-in-Sound Awards are presented every year at the NHCA Conference. The inaugural awards were presented in 2009 and recipients included Pratt & Whitney and Domtar Paper Company for the manufacturing sector, Montgomery County Water Services (Ohio) for the services sector, and Sensaphonics Hearing Conservation, Inc. for innovation. Several of the award recipients have reported that noise control is a cost-effective primary preventive strategy, and that their results encouraged them to expand the adoption and implementation of noise control alternatives. Such approaches include "Buy-Quiet" and "Quiet-by-Design" initiatives. These are programs guiding purchasers to compare the noise emission levels of different models of equipment, and whenever possible, select the quieter model. == Categories == There are two main categories of Safe-in-Sound Awards: the Excellence Award and the Innovation Award. === Excellence Award === The Safe-in-Sound Excellence in Hearing Loss Prevention Award is meant to honor remarkable hearing loss prevention implementations in the workplace. This award was initially divided into three possible awards based on the sector the project is working with: construction, manufacturing, and service. In 2016, applications for the award started to be accepted from all industrial sectors. === Innovation Award === The Safe-in-Sound Innovation in Hearing Loss Prevention Award may be awarded to individuals or organizations that address challenges in workplace hearing loss prevention in an innovative way. Consideration for this award may include advancements in the areas of policy, program development/implementation, and outreach. == Notable recipients == *2012 (Excellence): Colgate-Palmolive, for interventions such as an online training in noise control engineering, and company-wide implementation of the NIOSH recommended 85-dBA limit for 8-hour noise exposure. In 2013, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) highlighted this particular Safe-in-Sound recipient in their OSHA Technical Manual (OTM), which provides information and guidance on workplace hazards. *2015 (Excellence): United Technologies Corporation (UTC), for their extensive efforts to reduce the exposure of their employees to hazardous chemicals and industrial noise. *2016 (Excellence): 3M Alexandria plant, for their successful reduction of noise exposure within their facility (12-14 dBA across 24 departments). The initiatives implemented by 3M proved to be cost- effective, utilized Buy-Quiet principles, and resulted in 199 of 203 no longer being required to complete the 3M Alexandria Hearing Conservation Program. *2017 (Innovation): Sound Prevention Law Enforcement Solutions, for their efforts to promote hearing loss prevention and dissemination of evidence-based information to reduce the effects of noise among the law enforcement community. *2018 (Innovation): U.S. Army's Tactical Communications and Protective System, for their support for the mission of the Program Executive Office - Soldier (known as PEO-Soldier) to develop, acquire, field, and sustain affordable integrated state-of-the-art equipment to improve Army operations. *2019 (Innovation): Kurt Yankaskas of the Office of Naval Research (ONR) and the Noise-Induced Hearing Loss (NIHL) Research Program. The Noise- Induced Hearing Loss (NIHL) Research Program adopted a systems approach which is its innovative foundation. The approach taken maximized the use of various funding strategies within Department of the Navy and DoD and not only expanded partnerships, but also fostered collaborations among principal investigators. *2020 (Innovation): Multilateral Medical Operations Panel's Acoustics Sub- Working Group for the International Space Station (ISS), for the management of the acoustic environment on the International Space Station and activities to protect the hearing of those who work at the station. The group worsk with the astronauts to monitor noise levels on the Space Station, identify noisy tasks or equipment for their Noise Hazard Inventory, test equipment for noise levels before it is sent to the ship, develop and implement solutions to reduce noise levels, recommends hearing protective devices to reduce crew noise exposures and perform audiometry before, during (on-orbit) and after flights. == See also == * Buy Quiet * List of occupational health and safety awards * Health effects from noise * Occupational hearing loss * Hearing Conservation * Occupational noise == References == == External links == * Official Website * https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/enews/enewsv13n11.html * https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/enews/enewsv10n11.html * https://blogs.cdc.gov/niosh-science-blog/2017/03/03/firing-range-program/ *Council for Accreditation in Occupational Hearing Conservation *National Hearing Conservation Association Category:Noise pollution Category:Hearing loss Category:Working conditions Category:Occupational safety and health awards Category:National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health Category:Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Category:Prevention in the United States Category:Acoustics Category:Sound 
