Salam () was a Persian newspaper published in Iran. It was very influential publication in the country during its brief existence from 1991 to 1999. ==History and profile== Salam was established by a group of reformist people attached to the Association of Combatant Clerics on 9 February 1991. The name of the paper was given by Ahmad Khomeini, Ayatollah Khomeini's son. It was the first reformist daily published following the Islamic revolution in Iran. The paper, based in Tehran, became one of the most read dailies in the country soon after its launch. The publisher of Salam was Mohammad Mousavi Khoeiniha and he remained in the post until 1999 when it was disestablished. In addition to quality editorials, it provided investigative articles about financial scandals. In fact, it was among the first newspapers in the country dealing with injustice and corruption. The paper also included a special section, in which readers wrote their comments or raised questions. The daily was anti- American and had social democrat and liberal stances. It criticized Ali Akbar Rafsanjani while he was serving as the President and advocated the next President Mohammad Khatami during his election campaign. One of the editor-in- chiefs of the daily was Ibrahim Abedi. Abbas Abdi also served in the post. ==Bans and closure== Abbas Abdi, editor-in-chief of Salam, was jailed for eight months in 1993 for his critical writings published in the paper. On 7 July 1999 Salam was temporarily banned by the Special Court for the Clergy following its publication of a secret ministry report. This incident led to six-day student demonstrations in Tehran. On 4 August the paper was banned for five years and its publisher, Mohammad Mousavi Khoeiniha, was banned from journalistic activity for three years.Attacks on the Press 1999: Iran Committee to Protect Journalists March 2000 ==See also== * List of newspapers in Iran ==References== Category:1991 establishments in Iran Category:1999 disestablishments in Iran Category:Defunct newspapers published in Iran Category:Mass media in Tehran Category:Newspapers published in Iran Category:Persian-language newspapers Category:Publications established in 1991 Category:Publications disestablished in 1999 
