Sergii Bondarchuk (Ukrainian: Sergii Vasil'ovich Bondarchuk) (born October 31, 1971) is a Ukrainian civic and political activist, officer of the Security Service of Ukraine, Hero of Ukraine. == Biography == Education: 1993 graduated from Kyiv Frunze Higher All-Army College. 1994 graduated from Institute of Security Service of Ukraine. 2004 graduated from Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, MA in Finance. 2015 graduated from Defense academy of the U.K., London. 1993-1995 officer, Security Service of Ukraine. 1995-2001 top- manager, partner of a company dealing with energy issues, military-industrial complex. Deputy Chairman of Board, "Energooborudovanie" company of the Malyshev Armoured Tank Plant, city of Kharkiv. 2002-2005 Member of Parliament, official representative of Viktor Yushchenko, participant of the "Orange revolution". March 23, 2005 appointed by Decree of President of Ukraine V. Yushchenko as Director General, State company for export and import of military and special products and services "Ukrspetsexport". August 2008 - until now persona non grata in Russian Federation. Federal Security Service of Russia issued the arrest order for active participation in strengthening the defense capacity of Georgia during Russian aggression. June 10, 2010 fired from position of Director General of "Ukrspetsexport" by decree of Viktor Yanukovych, President of Ukraine. 2010 President of the "New traditions" charitable foundation. 2010-2013 member of ruling bodies of "Nasha Ukraina" ("Our Ukraine") political party of Victor Yushchenko. Initiator of the dissolution of this party. The reason for dissolution was the revealed facts of replacement of members of district commissions and observers from "Our Ukraine" Party in the interests of the "Party of Regions", which opened the door to falsify 2012 Parliamentary elections. Given the revealed facts, the progressive wing of "Our Ukraine" Party reached a decision to publicly shut it down, as well as to hand over the seal, the certificate of registration and the flag to the "Museum of the Orange Revolution". 2012-2013 organizer of various initiatives aimed at strengthening the European integration vector of Ukraine: "Evronastup" ("Euro-advance"), "Euroreferendum", "Vilni lyudy" ("Free people"). November 8, 2013 publicly declares that in case the Association Agreement with the EU is not signed, "Euro-maidan" will arise all over Ukraine. When "Euro-maidan" started off, the "Vilni lyudy" ("Free people") organization formed the basis for the 14th and 15th hundreds of self-defense. Becomes the author of the wording "Euro-maidan". May 2014 returned to service in the Security Service of Ukraine, "Alpha" special forces. December 2014 was sent to the UK to study in the Defense academy of the U.K. until May 2015. In 2015 appealed to the British authorities for political asylum due to political persecution in Ukraine by President P. Poroshenko. 2018 the UK granted him a political asylum since the criminal case against him was recognized as fabricated by the General Prosecutor's Office of Ukraine on the instructions of President P. Poroshenko. In the same year, Ukraine was denied an extradition request. 2019 removed from Interpol's wanted list. The criminal case is recognized as politically motivated. Married, has a daughter and a son. == Awards == *Hero of Ukraine (with the award of the Order of the State, February 18, 2010 - "for outstanding personal merits to the Ukrainian state in the development of military-technical cooperation, increasing the international authority of Ukraine, many years of fruitful work"). The title was given for assistance in strengthening Georgia's defense capacity during the Russian aggression. * Order of Vakhtang Gorgasal, I Degree (State award of Georgia. Foreign citizens who have shown courage and self-sacrifice in the struggle for independence and territorial integrity of Georgia can be awarded with this Order. November 5, 2013 - "for special services to the people and homeland, for defense and self-sacrifice"). == Links == Official Facebook Category:1971 births Category:Living people 
