Shirin Framroze Darasha (27 December 1938 - 2 May 2012) headed the J.B. Petit High School For Girls as the School Principal for over three decades, from 1973 - 2006. A renowned Indian educator, playwright and feminist she challenged many stereotypes and traditions in Indian society. She had strong views on the importance of "joy" during childhood. She was not in favour of the excessive work-load and homework fetish that continued to dominate the Indian educational scene. She took issue with the prevalent view that girls were at a disadvantage apropos of mathematics and sciences. Darasha maintained that in a nurturing environment where they were not set up to fail in comparison with boys, girls would flourish and blossom. Her creative use of drama in education was an extension of her enduring interest in the stage - as playwright, producer and director. Over the years, Darasha established herself as a distinct and passionate figure in the field of female education in India. == Early life and background == Shirin Darasha was born to a Parsi family and raised in Bombay, India. On graduating (matriculation) from Queen Mary School, Bombay she attended St. Xavier's College, Mumbai, studying for a Bachelor's in Psychology. On completion, she studied further to earn her master's degree in Psychology, also from Bombay University. To pursue further studies abroad, Shirin Darasha was awarded the Fulbright scholarship. She completed her master's degree in Education from East-West Center, Hawaii. == Career == Prior to her appointment as Principal of J.B. Petit School in 1972, Shirin Darasha worked at Hindi Vidya Bhavan and The Bombay International School. Darasha was a talented playwright who focussed on themes and personalities associated with twentieth century Indian history. Her popular play "Madam Cama" was first staged in 1988. In 1990, during the Fifth World Zoroastrian Congress, a special performance of the play was included in the proceedings. The play was also televised on Doordarshan. In her plays, Darasha challenged social conventions that resulted in women being stereotyped. She was particularly caustic about matrimonial advertisements; she dealt head-on with the Indian preference for "light complexions" and made a characteristic case for how "dark skin" was beautiful. Darasha's collaborations with Pearl Padamsee in various stage productions in Mumbai were well known and widely admired. Darasha was elated when her J.B. School Debate Team won the all-India Debate Competition hosted by the Foundation for Universal Responsibility of His Holiness the Dalai Lama; the prize was a trip for the whole debate team and for Darasha to visit the Dalai Lama at his ashram and have a private audience with him. This was particularly appropriate given Darasha's interest and identification with Buddhism. In February 1988, Zoroastrian community magazine Parisiana ran an article entitled "The 'Principal' of Drama" which focused on her lifelong passion for the stage. In her interview, she declared that she did not consider herself religious, though she had Buddhist leanings. When she died, based on her instructions, her body was cremated in a simple non- denominational funeral service. == Death == At the age of 74, Shirin Darasha died of pulmonary fibrosis. She was cremated, and her funeral was attended by hundreds of students and teachers who had been taught, mentored and inspired by her over the decades. == Gallery == File:Irish_Blessing_that_Shirin_Darasha_handed_out_to_every_student_and_teacher_under_her_aegis.jpg|Inspirational blessing that Shirin Darasha handed out to each and every student and teacher who was under her aegis when she was principal == References == == External links == * Category:Indian theatre directors Category:Indian theatre managers and producers Category:Indian feminists Category:Indian women educational theorists Category:1938 births Category:2012 deaths Category:Businesspeople from Mumbai Category:Indian women theatre directors Category:St. Xavier's College, Mumbai alumni Category:Indian psychologists Category:Women psychologists Category:20th-century Indian educational theorists Category:20th-century Indian businesspeople Category:Women educators from Maharashtra Category:20th-century Indian businesswomen Category:Educators from Maharashtra Category:Parsi people from Mumbai Category:20th-century women educators Category:Indian Buddhists 
