The Siege of Krakow was one of the military conflicts of the Swedish and Transylvanian invasion of Poland, which took place in the summer of 1657. The royal city of Krakow, had been occupied for two years by a Swedish- Transylvanian garrison led by Paul Wirtz and Janos Bethlen. It was besieged by Polish Army of Hetman Jerzy Lubomirski, supported by soldiers of the Holy Roman Empire under Austrian Field Marshal Melchior von Hatzfeldt. == Background == Two years prior to the 1657 siege, in the summer of 1655, two armies of the Swedish Empire invaded the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, see Deluge (history). The Swedish invaders moved southwards, reaching the city of Krakow in late September 1655. After the Siege of Krakow (1655), the ancient Polish capital surrendered, and on October 17, Swedish soldiers along with King Charles X Gustav entered the city. The looting of Krakow's treasures followed.Dariusz Milewski, Szwedzi w Krakowie (The Swedes in Krakow) Mowia Wieki monthly, 08.06.2007, Internet Archive. In some districts not a single house was left standing, as in Garbary and in Biskupie. For the next two years the amount of destruction, pillage and methodical plunder was so enormous that some former parts of the city had never recovered from it. According to the Treaty of Radnot signed on December 6, 1656, Krakow was to be occupied by Prince of Transylvania, George II Rakoczi, who was an ally of Charles X Gustav. In January 1657, the Transylvanian army invaded southern provinces of the Kingdom of Poland (Red Ruthenia and Lesser Poland), and on March 28, the Transylvanians reached Krakow. Rakoczi left, in the city, some 2,500 soldiers, who strengthened the Swedish garrison already stationed there. Most of the Transylvanian army headed northwards, to meet the Swedes. == Siege == In early summer 1657, Polish Crown units under Hetman Jerzy Lubomirski arrived near Krakow, but lacking artillery, the Poles limited their activities to cutting Swedish and Transylvanian supply routes. In early August, the 17,000 strong army of Holy Roman Empire, under Field Marshal Melchior von Hatzfeldt, reinforced the Poles, and began preparations for an assault. On August 4, however, a message from Rakoczi was received by both sides. Since his army had been destroyed in the Battle of Czarny Ostrow (July 20), Rakoczi urged Janos Bethlen to surrender the city to the Poles. The Transylvanians capitulated, but Swedish garrison of Krakow, under Paul Wirtz, continued resistance until August 25. Five days later, Swedish units left the city, and on September 4, Poles, together with Austrians, organized a military parade, observed by King Jan Kazimierz. == Aftermath == Rakoczi exiting through destroyed Zawichost. The sheer size of his army required that in order to requisite adequate food, it migrated between regions constantly like a cloud of locusts After a two- year Swedish and Transilvanian occupation, the ancient capital of Poland was in ruins. All villages and towns in the area were burned to the ground, as well as the suburbs of Krakow. In Kleparz, only 15 people dwelled in huts, while at Bishop Square, only 5 houses remained, out of 51. In the district of Piaski, which had several hundred houses before the Swedish invasion, not a single building remained. The Wawel Hill was completely looted, as Swedes and Transylvanians had stolen almost everything of value: including the Polish treasury, books, carpets and even upholstery. Furthermore, Swedes destroyed the tomb of St. Stanislaus. == Sources == * Jaroslaw Stolicki, Oblezenie Krakowa przez Jerzego Lubomirskiego w latach 1656-1657. SiM do historii wojskowosci, vol. XL, Bialystok 2003, pp. 87-117 * Leszek Podhorodecki, Rapier i koncerz, Warszawa 1985, , pp. 345-346 Category:Conflicts in 1657 Category:1657 in Europe Category:History of Krakow Category:Battles of the Deluge (history) Category:Sieges involving Poland Category:Sieges involving Sweden Category:1657 in Poland 
