Sigrid Agnes Maria Kaag (; born 2 November 1961) is a Dutch diplomat and politician, serving as Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation in the Third Rutte cabinet since 26 October 2017 and as the leader of the Democrats 66 since 4 September 2020. A diplomat by occupation, Kaag worked as a civil servant for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs from 1990 until 1993 when she became a United Nations official for the UNRWA in Jerusalem from 1994 until 1997. Kaag worked as a administrator at the International Organization for Migration in Geneva from 1998 until 2004 when she became a senior advisor of the United Nations for Khartoum and Nairobi until 2005 when she became a senior official at UNICEF. Kaag served as Regional Director for Middle East and North Africa for UNICEF in Amman from 2007 until May 2010 when she was appointed Assistant Secretary-General and Director of the Bureau of External Relations of the UNDP in New York. She oversaw UNDP's strategic external engagement, organization-wide communication and advocacy, as well as resource mobilization. From January 2015 until October 2017 she served as the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon (UNSCOL). Prior to that she served as Under Secretary-General and Special Coordinator of the United Nations - Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (UN-OPCW) Joint Mission to eliminate the declared chemical weapons programme of the Syrian Arab Republic between October 2013 and September 2014. Until her mission in Syria she was employed as Assistant Secretary-General and Assistant Administrator and Director of the Bureau of External Relations and Advocacy of the United Nations Development Programme. ==Early life and education== Kaag was born in Rijswijk as the daughter of a classical pianist.Janine Di Giovanni (5 June 2014), Poison Control in Syria Newsweek. She grew up in Zeist and initially studied Arabic at Utrecht University, but later switched to The American University in Cairo where she obtained a B.A. degree in Middle East Studies in 1985. She subsequently obtained an M.Phil. degree in International Relations from St Antony's College (University of Oxford) in 1987, and an M.A. degree in Middle East Studies from the University of Exeter in 1988. She also received foreign relations training at the Clingendael Institute in The Hague, and studied at the French Ecole nationale d'administration (ENA). ==Career== Kaag addressing the United Nations Security Council in 2018 === Early career === After her studies, Kaag worked as analyst for Royal Dutch Shell in London, United Kingdom.Dutch woman Sigrid Kaag tasked with eradicating Syria's chemical weapons The Australian, 17 October 2013. Later, she worked for the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs as Deputy Head of the UN Political Affairs Department. During her time in the diplomatic service, she lived and worked in Beirut, Vienna, and Khartoum. === 1994-2013: Career at the United Nations === Kaag started working for the United Nations in 1994 and first served as Senior United Nations Adviser in the Office of the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Khartoum, Sudan. From 1998 to 2004 she was Chief of Donor Relations for the International Organization for Migration, and Senior Programme Manager with the External Relations Office of UNRWA in Jerusalem. Working in the Middle East she was responsible for areas as the occupied Palestinian territories, Lebanon, Jordan, and Syria. From 2007 to May 2010, Kaag was Regional Director for Middle East and North Africa for UNICEF in Amman. In May 2010 she was appointed Assistant Secretary-General and Assistant Administrator and Director of the Bureau of External Relations and Advocacy of the United Nations Development Programme in New York. In this capacity, she was the deputy to Helen Clark and oversaw UNDP's strategic external engagement, organization-wide communication and advocacy, as well as resource mobilization. === 2013-2014: Head of the OPCW-UN Joint Mission in Syria === On 13 October 2013, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon nominated Kaag to lead the OPCW-UN Joint Mission for the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons. The United Nations Security Council was set to vote on her nomination three days later, on 16 October. She was then officially confirmed for the position. Kaag led a team of one hundred experts who were responsible for ensuring the elimination of Syria's chemical weapon stockpiles before 30 June 2014. === 2014-2017: United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon === By the end of her term in September 2014, news media reported that Kaag was rumored to succeed Lakhdar Brahimi as UN Special Envoy to Syria. On 1 December 2014, the UN Secretary General Ban announced that Kaag would become the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon (UNSCOL), succeeding Sir Derek Plumbly. In early 2017, Kaag was considered by international media to be one of the candidates to succeed Helen Clark as Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme and head of the United Nations Development Group;French environment minister candidate for top UN aid job Radio France Internationale, 24 March 2017. the post eventually went to Achim Steiner. === 2017-present: Minister and D66 leadership candidate === Kaag meeting with State Counsellor of Myanmar Aung San Suu Kyi in 2018 United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Sigrid Kaag in 2019 Since 26 October 2017, Kaag has been serving as the Dutch Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation in the third government of Prime Minister Mark Rutte. After the resignation of Foreign Affairs Minister Halbe Zijlstra (VVD) on 13 February 2018, she was nominated ad interim to succeed him while conserving her other cabinet position. Sigrid Kaag was consequently the first female Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands. Since 2018, Kaag has been serving on the joint World Bank/WHO Global Preparedness Monitoring Board (GPMB), co-chaired by Elhadj As Sy and Gro Harlem Brundtland.WHO and World Bank Group Join Forces to Strengthen Global Health Security World Bank, press release of May 24, 2018. In 2019, she joined the World Economic Forum High-Level Group on Humanitarian Investing, co-chaired by Borge Brende, Kristalina Georgieva and Peter Maurer.World Economic Forum 2019 Annual Meeting launching a new Humanitarian Investing Initiative World Economic Forum, press release of January 18, 2019. On 21 June 2020, Kaag announced her candidacy for lijsttrekkerschap of the Democrats 66 party for the 2021 Dutch general election, with the ambition of becoming the Netherlands' first female Prime Minister. If elected lijsttrekker, she will become the second female party leader of D66 after Els Borst in 1998. Kaag was elected as Party Leader on 4 September 2020 and will lead the party during the Next Dutch general election. ==Honours and awards== * 2015 - Honorary LL.D. degree from the University of Exeter * 2016 - Wateler Peace Prize awarded by the Carnegie Foundation ==Other activities== ===International organizations=== * African Development Bank (AfDB), Ex-Officio Member of the Board of Governors (since 2017)AfDB Annual Report 2017 African Development Bank (AfDB). * Asian Development Bank (ADB), Ex-Officio Member of the Board of Governors (since 2017)Board of Governors Asian Development Bank (ADB). * European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), Ex-Officio Alternate Member of the Board of Governors (since 2017)Board of Governors European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). * Inter-American Investment Corporation (IIC), Ex-Officio Member of the Board of Governors (since 2017)Board of Governors Inter-American Investment Corporation (IIC). * Joint World Bank-IMF Development Committee, Alternate MemberMembers Joint World Bank-IMF Development Committee. * Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), World Bank Group, Ex-Officio Alternate Member of the Board of Governors (since 2017)Board of Governors Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), World Bank Group. * World Bank, Ex-Officio Alternate Member of the Board of Governors (since 2017)Board of Governors World Bank. * OECD/UNDP Tax Inspectors Without Borders (TIWB), Member of the Governing Board (since 2017)Governing Board OECD/UNDP Tax Inspectors Without Borders (TIWB). ===Non-profit organizations=== * P4G - Partnering for Green Growth and the Global Goals 2030, Member of the Board of Directors (since 2019)Board of Directors P4G - Partnering for Green Growth and the Global Goals 2030. * Generation Unlimited, Member of the Board (since 2018)World leaders unite under new initiative to provide quality education and training for young people Generation Unlimited, press release of 21 September 2018. * International Gender Champions (IGC), Member (since 2017)Members International Gender Champions (IGC). * Global Commission on the Stability of Cyberspace (GCSC), Member (2017)Commissioners Global Commission on the Stability of Cyberspace (GCSC). ==Personal life== Kaag is married and has four children. Her husband, Anis al-Qaq, is Palestinian, a deputy minister under Yasser Arafat in the 1990s, and used to be the Palestinian representative to Switzerland.Holland's new deputy foreign minister called Netanyahu a racist demagogue Kaag is a noted polyglot and speaks six languages: Dutch, English, French, Spanish, German and Arabic. She is a practicing Catholic. She was the first Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General featured in the Vogue fashion and lifestyle magazine. ==References== ==External links== *S.A.M. (Sigrid) Kaag MA, MPhil on Parlement.com |- |- |- Category:1961 births Category:Living people Category:Alumni of the University of Exeter Category:Alumni of St Antony's College, Oxford Category:Democrats 66 politicians Category:Dutch expatriates in England Category:Dutch expatriates in Switzerland Category:Dutch expatriates in Lebanon Category:Dutch expatriates in Syria Category:Dutch expatriates in Israel Category:Dutch expatriates in the United States Category:Dutch nonprofit directors Category:Dutch officials of the United Nations Category:Dutch Roman Catholics Category:Dutch women diplomats Category:Leaders of the Democrats 66 Category:Female foreign ministers Category:Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands Category:Ministers for Development Cooperation of the Netherlands Category:UNRWA officials Category:United Nations Development Programme officials Category:UNICEF people Category:People from Rijswijk Category:Women government ministers of the Netherlands Category:20th-century Dutch civil servants Category:20th-century Dutch diplomats Category:21st-century Dutch civil servants Category:21st-century Dutch diplomats Category:21st-century Dutch women politicians 
