Still life of roses, variegated tulips and other flowers in a sculpted vase Simon HardimeName variations: Simon Hardinck, Siemon Herdemee (1672-1737) was a Flemish painter of mixed Walloon and Flemish descent.Jacob Campo Weyerman, De levens-beschryvingen der Nederlandsche konst-schilders en konst- schilderessen, Volume 3, Dordrecht, Ab. Blusse en Zoon, 1729-1769, pp. 245-248 He is known for his paintings of flowers. He trained in Antwerp and later worked for a few years in the Dutch Republic. He then moved to London where he remained the rest of his life.Simon Hardime at the Netherlands Institute for Art History His patrons included the bourgeoisie in Brussels and Antwerp and aristocrats in the Netherlands and England. ==Life== Hardime was born in Antwerp as the son of a laborer with the same name, who was originally from Liege, and a Flemish mother. He became in 1684 a pupil of Jan Baptist de Crepu, a flower and fruit painter who was also of Walloon descent. De Crepu was originally an officer in the Spanish service who had only become a painter later in life when he settled in Antwerp.Frans Jozef Peter Van den Branden, Geschiedenis der Antwerpsche schilderschool, Antwerpen, 1883, p. 1149 De Crepu later fled his creditors and moved to Brussels where he died in 1689.Jacopo Lorenzelli, Eckard Lingenauber, Daniele Benati, The lure of still life, Galleria Lorenzelli, Galerie Lingenauber Galleria Lorenzelli, 1995, p. 230 Another pupil of de Crepu who studied at the same time as Hardime was the still life painter Jan Baptist Bosschaert. Wicker basket with roses, tulips, hyacinths and other flowers, on a wooden ledge After about four years in de Crepu's workshop, Hardime was registered as master in the Antwerp Guild of Saint Luke in the guild year 1688-89.Ph. Rombouts and Th. van Lerius, De Liggeren en andere Historische Archieven der Antwerpsche Sint Lucasgilde, onder Zinkspreuk: "Wy Jonsten Versaemt" afgeschreven en bemerkt door Ph. Rombouts en Th. Van Lerius, Advokaet, onder de bescherming van den raed van bestuer der koninklyke Akademie van beeldende Kunsten, van gezegde Stad, Volume 2, Antwerp, 1872, pp. 532 and 537 He worked in Antwerp where he was the teacher of his brother Pieter Hardime. The early biographer Jacob Campo Weyerman claims that he studied oil painting with Hardime.Jacob Campo Weyerman, De levens-beschryvingen der Nederlandsche konst-schilders en konst- schilderessen, Volume 4, Dordrecht, Ab. Blusse en Zoon, 1729-1769, p. 470 He also stated that Hardime spent much of his time drinking in taverns. This caused him to have money troubles. To escape his creditors he left Antwerp for The Hague where he stayed with his brother Pieter from 1697. He also worked for a while in Breda where he received a commission to paint a chimney piece for the palace of William III of England. Hardime left for London in 1702 where he remained active for the rest of his life. He received commissions from the Earl of Scarborough. Still life of roses and other flowers in a basket on a stone ledge He died in London in 1737. ==Works== Hardime was a painter of still lives with flowers. In the typical Flemish tradition, he painted these directly from nature. He preferred decorative effect over naturalistic representation. This is in line with trends in Flemish still life painting at the end of the 17th century and shows the influence of the French artist Jean-Baptiste Monnoyer, who worked for King Louis XIV of France.Sam Segal, A Flowery Past: A Survey of Dutch and Flemish Flower Painting from 1600 Until the Present : Gallery P. de Boer, Amsterdam, March 13 - April 11, 1982, Noordbrabants Museum, 's-Hertogenbosch, April 29 - May 30, 1982, Gallery P. de Boer, 198, pp. 59-60Attributed to Simon Hardime, Vase of Flowers and Insects at the Cheltenham Art Gallery & Museum The trend was initiated by contemporary Flemish artists Jan Baptist Bosschaert and Gaspar Peeter Verbruggen the Younger. The two artists often placed their flower bouquets in large stone vases or arranged them in the form of garlands around these vases or garden ornaments. In many of their compositions the vases were placed in outdoor settings with figures. This decorative style was followed not only by Simon Hardime but also by his brother Pieter and Pieter Casteels III. He painted the still life elements in the works of other painters such as Hendrik Herregouts. ==References== ==External links== Category:1672 births Category:1737 deaths Category:Flemish Baroque painters Category:Flemish still life painters Category:Artists from Antwerp Category:18th-century painters from the Southern Netherlands Category:Members of the Antwerp Guild of Saint Luke Category:Flower artists 
