Sincholagua is an inactive volcano located in Ecuador northeast of Cotopaxi Volcano and southeast of Quito.Rachoweicki, Rob and Mark Thurber. Ecuador: Climbing and Hiking Guide. Viva Pub. Network, 2008. p.208. It is the 12th highest peak in the country at but also one of the lesser known ones. The name of the mountain comes from the indigenous language Quichua and means "strong above".Brain, Yossi, Ecuador: A Climbing Guide, Seattle: Mountaineers, 2000. p.125. Due to its close proximity to Cotopaxi, the second highest peak in Ecuador and the most popular volcano, it is far less frequently visited compared to other mountains in the country. It has a sharp peak and at one point had glacial cover year round, but all of the glaciers melted a few decades ago. However, snow can still be seen on the peak since there is sometimes heavy snowfall at the summit.http://www.summitpost.org/sincholagua/672776. Andean, Boriss. "Sincholagua: Climbing, Hiking, and Mountaineering". summitpost.com. 8/16/12, 9/29/13 ==Climbing Sincholagua== Path leading to the summit of the Sincholagua Volcano (2018) Sincholagua is one of the least frequently climbed mountains in Ecuador because it is difficult to access and less well known compared to other mountains and volcanoes in the country. There is also a long hike to access it compared to other volcanoes like Pichincha and Cotopaxi, making it more difficult to get to.Newton, Paula. V!va Travel Guides: Ecuador and the Galapagos Islands. Viva Pub. Network, 2008 p.218. Sincholagua is best known for views of the surrounding mountains such as Cotopaxi and Antisana as well as the Western Cordillera and the Amazon rainforest. The climb is of moderate difficulty and takes an estimated three hours and thirty minutes to reach the summit from base camp with ideal weather conditions. The Northwest ridge is the normal route up the mountain and was used by the first climbers. People who want to climb it usually come in from the south through Cotopaxi National Park to reach the volcano. It can also be accessed from Quito. ==History== The first ascent of Sincholagua was made by Edward Whymper, Jean-Antoine Carrel and Louis Carrel on 23 February 1880.Whymper, Edward. Travels Amongst the Great Andes of the Equator. John Murray, 1892, p.159-164. Whymper is best known for being the first to ascend Matterhorn mountain in Switzerland. Sincholagua lost all permanent glaciers on its peak decades ago, but before that had a glacier cover about 1.5 kilometers long. A river that runs around and on the mountain, the Rio Pita, widened due to the last major eruption in 1877. When Whymper climbed Sincholagua, the Rio Pita was 200 feet wide and 3 feet deep, and in 1892, after the eruption it was 1,100 feet wide and 50 feet deep at its widest and deepest. Currently it is considered a stream. Edward Whymper, an English illustrator, was the first person to ascend Sincholagua. ===Air crash=== On 3 May 1995 a private Gulfstream II aircraft operated by American Jet, inbound from Buenos Aires via La Paz, selected the wrong VOR frequency during a nighttime approach to Quito's Mariscal Sucre Airport; the jet flew further south than it should have, striking Sincholagua at . All seven occupants were killed. The flight was carrying an important number of oil executives from Argentina and Chile to a meeting in Quito. Amongst those killed was Argentine YPF's CEO and president Jose Estenssoro, who had led privatization efforts under Carlos Menem; Juan Pedrals Gili, the Spanish-born general manager of Chilean ENAP as well as Manfred Hecht Mittersteiner, chief of production at ENAP's international subsidiary Sipetrol.https://www.nytimes.com/1995/05/05/obituaries/jose-estenssoro-61-who- led-oil-privatization-in- argentina.htmlhttp://www.upi.com/Archives/1995/05/04/Argentine-oil-chief-dies- in-plane-crash/5595799560000/ Accompanying Estensoro was the controversial economist Ricardo Zinn, who worked as viceminister of economy and finances during the government of Isabel Peron in 1975, and is considered the architect of the radical adjustment program known as the Rodrigazo, which contributed to erode the political and social stability of Argentina in the lead-up to the 1976 coup d'etat that installed the military dictatorship known as the National Reorganization Process (to which Zinn also contributed). ==References== Category:Stratovolcanoes of Ecuador Category:Inactive volcanoes 
