Slaughtered Vomit Dolls is a 2006 surrealist exploitation psychological horror film written and directed by Lucifer Valentine, who coined "vomit gore" as a new subgenre. The film had a simultaneous DVD and limited theatrical release on February 14, 2006. The film follows a very loose plot structure, consisting of assorted random scenes mostly revolving around Angela Aberdeen, a bulimic stripper-turned-prostitute. Slaughtered Vomit Dolls is a part of the Vomit Gore Trilogy and was followed by two sequels: ReGOREgitated Sacrifice (2008) and Slow Torture Puke Chamber (2010). A fourth "Vomit Gore" film - titled Vomit Gore 4: Black Mass of the Nazi Sex Wizard - was released in 2015. ==Synopsis== Angela Aberdeen (Ameara LaVey) is a teenage runaway that suffers from bulimia. In order to make ends meet, she begins working as a prostitute. As her bulimia worsens, Angela begins to experience a series of hallucinations where she experiences visions of the deaths of her fellow strippers as well as various others. == Cast == * Ameara LaVey as Angela Aberdeen (died 1 September 2017) * Pig Lizzy * Maja Lee * Princess Pam * Miss Pussy Pants * Allen Nasty * Hank Skinny ==Reception== JoBlo.com panned Slaughtered Vomit Dolls overall, saying that while they were curious to see what the director could do next, the film "ultimately fails to either entertain, shock, or put forth any novel ideas." HorrorNews.net also gave a negative review, criticizing the film and stating that "If you need a movie to have some form of a linear story, don't bother with this one. If you are tired of seeing women constantly berated and insulted and shown as weak and scared, don't bother with this one. And if vomit isn't your thing, yeah, definitely don't bother with this one." DVD Talk reviewed the trilogy as a whole and gave it a mostly positive review, saying that the films would not appeal to every viewer and that "for horror fans who want something different, something that mixes up art and sex and violence and gore and surrealism and who don't mind the confrontational nature of Valentine's work, this set is worth seeking out." == References == == External links == * * Category:Films about Satanism Category:Vomiting Category:2006 films Category:American films Category:Canadian films Category:2000s exploitation films Category:American splatter films Category:2006 horror films Category:Canadian independent films Category:American exploitation films Category:American sexploitation films Category:Canadian splatter films Category:English-language films Category:Films shot in Vancouver Category:Films about prostitution in Canada Category:2006 direct-to-video films Category:Direct-to-video horror films Category:American avant-garde and experimental films Category:Canadian avant-garde and experimental films Category:Obscenity controversies in film Category:2000s avant-garde and experimental films Category:2006 directorial debut films 
