Solvi Helgason (August 16, 1820 - November 27, 1895) was an artist, philosopher and drifter in Iceland in the 19th century. If he hadn't been arrested, we might not know anything more about Solvi than folk tales about his life. He never went to school, but was known to always be painting and writing. It is posited from his writings that he was mentally ill and suffered from paranoia; he was known to accuse people of stealing his work. He often referred to himself by made-up names as well as names of playwrights, artists, musicians and philosophers: Sokrates, Plato, Solon, Melanchthon, Solvi Spekingur, Sjulvi, Husfridur, Sjulvi Hinn Vitri, Humboldt, Spinoza, Gote, Hegel, Schiller, Schott, Newton, Caesar, Leonardo da Vinci, Vasco da Gama, Kant, Lamertine, Skagfjord Nordlandius, Beethoven and Shakespeare. Solvi was convicted several times for vagrancy, falsifying his traveling papers or passport and for petty theft. He was often flogged and spent three years in prison in Denmark. Today approximately 100 of Solvi's artworks and manuscripts are in the collection of the National and University Library of Iceland and the National Museum of Iceland. == Art == There are no known artworks dated prior to 1854, when Solvi first went to prison. Although it is believed that he was drawing from a young age, Solvi claimed in legal documents that his early artwork was destroyed. Solvi's artwork falls into two visual themes: 1) floral patterns with decorative capital letters and 2) figurative drawings. His floral patterns don't change at all in the documented 30 years. These pieces were typically gifts to the people he was staying with. The figurative drawings are mainly of people that Solvi had conflict with. He would add horns and extra eyes in an attempt to portray these people as demonic. These artworks show a more creative and emotional side to Solvi's artwork. == Life == === Early life === Solvi Helgason was born on a farm called Fjall in Slettuhliid in the eastern part of Skagafjordur on August 16, 1820. The day after he was born, he was baptized at the nearest church. Solvi's father was called Helgi Gudmundsson and his mother was called Ingiridur Gisladottir, they were young, poor farmers who moved often between farms. When Solvi was 4 his father died. He didn't live with his mother from the age of 6, he was fostered at various farms in the area around his home. His mother died when he was 14 years old. Oral history describes Solvi as reckless and unruly but that he showed signs of intelligence. There are also stories of a harsh upbringing. When Solvi was 11, he was fostered for two years by a reverend called Olafur Hjaltason Thorberg in Hvanneyri in Siglufjordur. The reverend he lived with had a library and it is thought that Solvi got his inspiration for his artwork from viewing illustrated books; he also stated in legal documents that he learned to read both in Icelandic and Danish at this farm. At the age of 15 Solvi was fostered at a farm called Undholl in Oslandshlid, which wasn't far from a regional trading center in Kolkuos, where Solvi may have purchased watercolor materials. Bjorn Thordarson, District Administrative Officer at Ystaholl helped Solvi get confirmed at a local church when he was 16 years old. When he was 18 years old, he was sent to Modruvellir in Horgadalur to stay with Bjarni Thorarensen who was a prefect and poet. He stayed there for at least one year before he went east to Thingeyjar and Mulasyslu. From there he started drifting around the country. === The drifter === Solvi traveled around Iceland trading drawings of people and decorative letter forms for food and a place to sleep. In October 1843, Solvi got arrested in Stadarsveit in Snaefellsnes. At that time, it was mandatory to have written permission from the sheriff in order to travel around Iceland; traveling papers or passport. Solvi's traveling papers weren't acceptable because they contained strange praising writings about him and had an obviously forged signature of the local sheriff. He later admitted that he had falsified this passport. On March 8, 1825, Solvi was sentenced for carrying a fake passport and for being a drifter. His punishment was 40 lashes and one year of supervision by the authorities. The punishment was reduced by the supreme court to 27 lashes and 8 months of supervision. In March 1850, Solvi was arrested again after being accused of stealing books and clothing. The authorities couldn't prove he had done so, however because of his history of petty theft and his continual illegal drifting around Iceland, he was sentenced in 1854 to spend three years in a prison in Copenhagen. In 1858 he came back to Iceland and was sent back to his home region. When he discussed his stay in Denmark, he pretended that he had been a free man. === Family === After his imprisonment in Denmark, sometime after 1860, Solvi stayed at a farm in Hunavatnssysla. There he met the Juliana Sveinbjornsdottir, who is described as being both physically and mentally disabled, and who became his lover and traveling partner. Solvi would carry Juliana in a sack on his back while they traveled around Iceland; people would laugh and make fun of the pair, but Solvi and Juliana ignored the mockery, because there was no better way to travel. Together Solvi and Juliana had one daughter, Stefania Kristin Solvadottir, in 1867. Because of his constant drifting, Solvi didn't raise his daughter; she was considered to look very much like him, but they probably didn't know each other well. Stefania had two children in Iceland, then just before 1900, she moved to America and had more children. == References == * Adalsteinn Ingolfsson. Einfarar i islenskri myndlist. Reykjavik: Almenna bokafelagid in collaboration with Iceland Review, 1990. * Ingunn Jonsdottir. "Solvi Helgason". Islenskir sagnathaettir. II edition. Gunnar S. Thorleifsson collector. Reykjavik: Bokautgafan Hildur, 1983. * Jon Oskar. Solvi Helgason. Listamadur a hrakningum. Reykjavik: Isafoldarprentsmidjan corporation, 1984. * Petur Jokull Petursson: "AEviagrip Solva Helgasonar Gudmundsen". Glettingur 1992 (2): 28-36. * Solvi Helgason. Hin hvita holl og Solvasalur. Personal letter to Briem, Sheriff of Skagafjordur. Year unknown. ==External links== *Solvi Helgason display at Reykjavik Art Museum Category:1820 births Category:1895 deaths Category:Icelandic philosophers Category:19th-century Icelandic painters Category:19th-century male artists Category:Male painters 
