Soto-Michigan Jewish Community Center (1934-2006) was a community center located at the corner of Soto Street and Michigan Avenue in the Boyle Heights section of Los Angeles. The building was notable for its architecture. It has since closed and the building was demolished in 2006. In 1934, when the center was established, it was located in Boyle Heights, a thriving Jewish neighborhood, and the center served the needs of the community for many years. Its main services were athletic activities and community organization. It also functioned during weekday afternoons as a Hebrew school, directed by Rabbi Moses Tolchinsky. After World War II, the demographics of the city began to change, and by 1958 Boyle Heights was primarily a Mexican-American neighborhood. The building was sold in 1959, but continued serving as a community center. It was renamed, The All Nations Neighborhood Center. The center continued its mission as a center for neighborhood youth. In the 1970s and early 80s, Bill Maxwell was director of the center. At his direction, the center added art-oriented services, including photography equipment and gallery space for budding local artists, in addition to the usual athletics based activities."A Simple Suggestion" "avanishingworld.wordpress.com" July 2009 Within a year or two, All Nations became a victim of budget cuts and the center was closed.Simple Suggestion" "Sean Carrillo" July 2009 The building was sold in the mid 80's to Mr. Alfredo Zamarripa. Soon after purchasing the building, Mr. Zamarripa began to rebuild and clean up the building, as it had been left in a disarray state. Mr. Zamarripa was able to convert the JCC\All Nation Center buildings into rental halls. This provided the local Boyle Heights communities and surrounding communities a place to host large birthday parties, and other special events. Mr. Zamarripa continued his business until his passing in 1993. His daughter Rosa Zamarripa took over the business and kept the tradition alive from 1993-2006. In 2006 an investor approached the Zamarripa family with an offer, they agreed on the offer, and sold the property soon after. == Architecture == The building was designed by Raphael Soriano, one of the architects selected to participate in the Case Study Houses project. Soriano received the commission as a result of his friendship with noted architectural photographer Julius Shulman.Aaron Paley "Playing Jewish Geography With Julius Shulman", "The Jewish Daily FORWARD", June 27, 2008 == Cultural Legacy == During the first protracted boycott of Gallo wines in the 1970s (based on their intransigence in dealing with the newly organized United Farm Workers)Carol Radway and Christopher Tilly, "Gallo Boycott: The UFW merits student support", "The Harvard Crimson", Feb 11, 1975 artist Carlos Almaraz painted a mural on the southern wall entitled "No Compre Vino Gallo" (Don't Buy Gallo Wine). The mural was painted over after some years. == Demolition == In 2006, the building, which had been owned by the Zamarripa family for several years, was sold in 2006. Soon after the sale the new owners demolished the building without a proper permit,Lynn Doan "Demolition of Cultural Icon Spurs Anger", "Los Angeles Times", March 16, 2006 thus destroying forever an important work by a major architect and one of the few buildings of this stature east of the LA River. A federal agency had leased the site, and the city building department assumed incorrectly that it had no jurisdiction over development for a federally leased site. === References === Category:Boyle Heights, Los Angeles Category:Community centers in California Category:Jews and Judaism in Los Angeles Category:1934 establishments in California 
