Spencer James Cox (born July 11, 1975) is an American attorney and politician. A member of the Republican Party, Cox is the eighth lieutenant governor of Utah. Cox is the Republican nominee for the 2020 Utah gubernatorial election. Cox was raised in Fairview, Utah. He was appointed to Fairview's city council, and later acted as the city's mayor. After overseeing rural economic development in Fairview, Cox was elected as a county commissioner for Sanpete County in 2008, and to the Utah House of Representatives in 2012. In October 2013, Governor Gary Herbert selected Cox to replace Greg Bell as lieutenant governor, and he was confirmed unanimously by the Utah Senate. Cox is the Republican nominee for governor in 2020 after Herbert decided to retire. == Early life and career == Cox was raised in Sanpete County, and graduated from North Sanpete High School. He enrolled at Snow College and completed a mission to Mexico for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints while he was a student. During that time, he also married his high school sweetheart, Abby, who also graduated from Snow College. After graduating with an associate's degree, he attended Utah State University (USU), where he obtained his bachelor's degree in political science and Abby obtained her degree in special education. At USU, Cox was named Student of the Year and graduated with a 4.0 grade point average. Accepted to Harvard Law School, Cox instead enrolled at the Washington and Lee University School of Law, where he received his Juris Doctor. After law school, Cox clerked for Judge Ted Stewart of the U.S. District Court for the District of Utah. Following his clerkship, Cox joined Fabian and Clendenin, a Salt Lake City law firm. He returned to rural Utah and became a vice president of CentraCom. == Political career== Cox was appointed as a city councilor of Fairview, Utah, and elected mayor the next year. In 2008, he was elected as a Sanpete County commissioner. Cox was elected to the Utah House of Representatives in 2012 and became the first member to call for the impeachment of John Swallow, the attorney general of Utah, over violations of laws governing campaign finance. Cox and Lieutenant Governor Bell served as co-chairs of Governor Herbert's Rural Partnership Board. In October 2013, Herbert selected Cox to succeed Bell as lieutenant governor, following Bell's resignation. His nomination was approved unanimously by the Utah Senate's Government Operations Confirmation Committee on October 15. The next day, he was confirmed unanimously by the full Utah Senate and sworn in. As lieutenant governor, Cox's office produced a report on Swallow's financial interests, demonstrating that Swallow had failed to properly disclose all of his income and business interests. Swallow resigned before the release of the report. On May 14, 2019, Cox announced his intent to seek the Republican nomination for Governor of Utah in 2020. Cox won the Republican primary election with 36.4% of the vote, while Jon Huntsman Jr. received 34.6%.https://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/504873-cox-wins-gop-primary-to- replace-utah-gov-gary-herbert ===Political positions=== In October 2015, Cox endorsed Marco Rubio for the Republican Party nomination in the 2016 presidential primary. After Rubio withdrew, Cox endorsed Ted Cruz in March 2016. Of Donald Trump, the front-runner, Cox said: "We care a lot about decorum. We care about our neighbors. We are a good, kind people. He does not represent neither goodness nor kindness." He said he would not support Trump if he wins the Republican nomination: "I think he's disingenuous. I think he's dangerous. I think he represents the worst of what our great country stands for.... I won't vote for Hillary, but I won't vote for Trump, either." On June 13, 2016, Cox spoke at a vigil in Salt Lake City honoring those who died in the Orlando nightclub shooting the day before. He surprised many when he apologized for mistreating schoolmates and his lack of support for the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender community. He aimed part of his speech at the "straight community": ==Personal life== Cox is the oldest of eight children and grew up on a farm in Fairview. He and his wife, Abby, have four children, and reside on their family farm in Fairview. Cox's father, Eddie, serves on the Utah Transportation Commission and was also a Sanpete County commissioner. Cox plays bass guitar in a garage band. His brother-in-law, Travis Osmond, the son of Merrill Osmond, taught him how to play the bass. State Representative Mike McKell is also a brother-in-law. Cox's fourth cousin, Jon Cox, succeeded him in the Utah House of Representatives. ==References== ==External links== *Lt. Governor Spencer J. Cox government website *Campaign website * |- |- Category:1975 births Category:20th-century Mormon missionaries Category:21st-century American politicians Category:American bass guitarists Category:American Mormon missionaries in Mexico Category:Businesspeople from Utah Category:County commissioners in Utah Category:Latter Day Saints from Utah Category:Lieutenant Governors of Utah Category:Living people Category:Mayors of places in Utah Category:Members of the Utah House of Representatives Category:People from Mount Pleasant, Utah Category:People from Sanpete County, Utah Category:Snow College alumni Category:Utah city council members Category:Utah lawyers Category:Utah Republicans Category:Utah State University alumni Category:Washington and Lee University School of Law alumni Category:21st-century American bass guitarists Category:Candidates in the 2020 United States elections 
