The Spreuer Bridge (, formerly also Muhlenbrucke) is one of two extant covered wooden footbridges in the city of Lucerne, Switzerland. Besides the other preserved bridge, the Kapellbrucke, a third bridge of this type - the Hofbrucke - existed in Lucerne, but was demolished in the 19th century. == History == The first bridge was constructed in the 13th century to connect the Muhlenplatz (Mill Place) on the right bank of the Reuss with the mills in the middle of the river. The extension of the bridge to the left bank was completed only in c. 1408. This was the only bridge in Lucerne where it was allowed to dump chaff (in German: Spreu, therefore the name Spreuerbrucke) and leaves into the river, as it was the bridge farthest downriver. The bridge was destroyed by a flood in 1566 and then rebuilt, together with a granary as the bridge head, called the Herrenkeller. == Totentanz == The pediments of the Spreuer Bridge contain paintings in the interior triangular frames, which is a feature unique to the wooden bridges of Lucerne. In the case of the Spreuer Bridge, the paintings form a Danse Macabre, known as Totentanz in German, which was created from 1616 to 1637 under the direction of painter Kaspar Meglinger. It is the largest known example of a Totentanz cycle. Of the 67 original paintings, 45 are still in existence. Most of the paintings contain the coat of arms of the donor in the lower left corner and to the right the coat of arms of the donor's wife. The black wooden frames bear explanations in verse and the names of the donors. The paintings also contain portraits of the donors and other exponents of Lucerne society. The painters of Lucerne knew the woodcuts by Hans Holbein the Younger but were more advanced in their painting technique. The images and texts of the Lucerne Danse Macabre are intended to highlight that there's no place in the city, in the country or at sea where death isn't present.Hans Georg Wehrens: Der Totentanz im alemannischen Sprachraum. "Muos ich doch dran - und weis nit wan". Schnell & Steiner, Regensburg 2012. . p. 191ff. == References == == Further reading == * Josef Brulisauer et al.: Die Spreuerbrucke in Luzern. Ein barocker Totentanz von europaischer Bedeutung. Raeber, Luzern 1996. . * Rolf Paul Dreier: Der Totentanz - ein Motiv der kirchlichen Kunst als Projektionsflache fur profane Botschaften (1425-1650). Leiden 2010. . p. 179-216. * Caspar Meglinger: Der Todtentanz. Gemalde auf der Muhlenbrucke in Luzern. Eglin, Luzern 1881. digitized edition at University and State Library Dusseldorf * The dance of death on the Muhlenbruke at Lucerne. Eglin, Luzern 1893 digitized edition at University and State Library Dusseldorf == External links == Category:Buildings and structures in Lucerne Category:Pedestrian bridges in Switzerland Category:Bridges completed in 1408 Category:Covered bridges in Switzerland Category:Tourist attractions in the canton of Lucerne Category:Monuments and memorials in Switzerland Category:Cultural property of national significance in the canton of Lucerne Category:Wooden bridges in Switzerland 
