Suhail Abdul Latif Galadari () (born July 8, 1977) is an Emirati businessman. He is a Director at Galadari Brothers. He is a shareholder via Galadari Printing and Publishing in the UAE's Dubai prominent English language newspaper Khaleej Times. Galadari Brothers LLC has investments in print and online media in the Middle East. Other companies under the Galadari Group in the UAE include Mazda UAE,ME Newswire: kldry llsyrt tfttH q`@ l`rD lmtTwr@ "byt mzd" Baskin Robbins Ice Cream, Galadari Sri Lanka Hotel, Galadari Construction, JCB General heavy equipment. The group also has stakes in Galadari Cement in Karachi Pakistan. Suhail Galadari is also founder of the trading company "Suhail Abdul Latif Galadari Trading Establishment" headquartered in Dubai, UAE. He has invited several Bollywood stars to UAE due to their popularity in the region. Suhail inaugurated the state-of-the-art Mazda showroom on Sheikh Zayed Road which strengthened the tie between Galadari Automobiles Co. Ltd. and Mazda Motor Corporation. Suhail lives in Dubai UAE and his group spearhead Khaleej Times was the media partner of Peshawar Zalmi cricket team, which won the 2017 PSL title after defeating Quetta Gladiators in Lahore in March. Suhail Galadari also co-owns the Benoni Zalmi franchise. ==Personal life== Suhail Galadari is the eldest son of the late Abdul Latif Al Galadari. He completed a part of his education in Dubai (UAE) and London (UK). Bollywood actors like Ranbir Kapoor, Saif Ali Khan, Akshay Kumar, Salman Khan, Amitabh Bachchan often visit him in the Dubai- located headquarters of Khaleej Times. Akshay Kumar, Kajal, Anupam Kher promote Special Chabbis in Dubai with Galadari and his newspaper. He welcomed Saif Ali Khan and Kareena Kapoor in Khaleej Times headquarter on 7 November 2009.http://www.pakistan.tv/videos-suhail-galadari-with-saif-ali- khan-%5BncvSmgUzFco%5D.cfm Bollywood films and Indian music videos have featured his newspaper and he has also granted permission to Bollywood actor Shah Rukh Khan to use his SL65 Black Series in the film Happy New Year. ==References== Suhail Galadari (right) hands over the Best Actor (Critics Choice) Male award to Amitabh Bachchan for the film Piku at TOIFA Galadari hands over the Asian Icon of the Year Award to Kareena Kapoor Khan ==External links== * *Facebook *Instagram Category:Emirati businesspeople Category:1977 births Category:Living people Category:Emirati people of Pakistani descent 
