Sunita S. Mukhi is a cultural producer, theater/performance artist, and an interdisciplinary performance scholar. == Early life == Her early education was from St. Scholastica's College, Manila, Philippines. She has a BA in Behavioral Sciences and in Literature from De La Salle University, Manila, Philippines; an M.A. degree in Interdisciplinary Studies in the Social Sciences from San Francisco State University; and a PhD in Performance Studies from New York University. == Career == === Educator === Her book entitled Doing the Desi Thing: Performing Indianness in New York City was published in year 2000 by Taylor and Francis. Her work appears in the anthologies Contours of the Heart, A Patchwork Shawl and in the Little India magazine and in the anthology Desilicious: Sexy, Subversive, South Asian. In September 2011, she participated in a forum discussion published by The Asian American Literary Review in response to the question "What did September 11th do to the concept of 'Asian America'?" She has developed courses on Indian Cinema(s)and Indian Culture, Contemporary Performance and Film in the South Asian American Communities, Cultures of the South Asian Diaspora, Asian American Contemporary Performance, and Asian American Film and Society. For the study abroad program in Bangalore (2006 to 2008), she acted as assistant director and designed and taught two courses: Experiencing Contemporary India and Contemporary Performance in India. She is currently a board member of the South Asian Women's Creative Collective. ==References== Category:Living people Category:1960 births Category:Filipino performance artists Category:American people of Indian descent Category:American people of Sindhi descent Category:Filipino people of Indian descent Category:Filipino people of Sindhi descent Category:Filipino emigrants to the United States Category:Sindhi people Category:De La Salle University alumni Category:San Francisco State University alumni Category:New York University alumni 
