Taj Haider, SI (Urdu: tj Hydr; born 8 March 1942) is a notable left-wing politician, nationalist, playwright, mathematician, versatile scholar, and Marxist intellectual. He is one of the founding members of Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) and has been the general-secretary of the PPP since 2010. A mathematician and scientist by profession, Haider provided a vital leadership in the formative years of clandestine atomic bomb projects in the 1970s. He is also noted for his writing of political plays for the Pakistan Television (PTV) from 1979 to 1985. ==Biography== === Education === Taj Haider was born on 8 March 1942 in Kota, Rajasthan, British Indian Empire, to an educated and enlightened family; his family briefly migrated to Pakistan following the partition of India in 1947. After graduating from a local high school, Haider ultimately enrolled in Karachi University in 1959. He studied Mathematics at the Karachi University and graduated with a BSc (hons) in Mathematics in 1962. In 1965, he earned his MSc in mathematics from the same institution and opted for teaching mathematics at the local college, later moving to Karachi University. During his career at the Karachi University, Haider's primary taught and focused on the ordinary differential equations and topics in multivariable calculus. === PPP and political activism === During the attendance of 1967 socialist convention, Haider was one of the founding members of the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) and committed himself as a vehement support of change left-oriented philosophy of Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto. In the 1970s, he played a vital role in formulating the public policy concerning the atomic bomb projects. On multiple occasions, he provided his expertise on taking moral stance on nuclear weapons initiatives at the diplomatic conventions. On nuclear weapons development, Haider stated that "there was a need to aggressively project the peaceful intent of Pakistan's atomic bomb program." Haider disassociated himself with the politics but remain member of Pakistan Mathematical Society and shifted towards writing political dramas at the Pakistan Television (PTV) in 1979. The PTV on-aired various political dramas written by Haider until 1985 when he renewed his association with PPP. In 1990-2000, he contributed in PPP-initiated industrial projects such as the establishment of Heavy Mechanical Complex (HMC), Hub Dam and various other social programmes. In 2001, Haider returned to his literary activities after rejoining the PTV, and penned two political drama serials for the PTV which went aired-on in 2003. In 2004, he returned to politics in opposition to President Pervez Musharraf over the issue of nuclear proliferation. He bitterly criticised the United States over the sanctions of KRL and one of the noted politician expressing the discontent against the US, along with Raza Rabbani in 2004. About the nuclear proliferation case, Haider defended the case of Abdul Qadeer Khan in the public and condemned the Information minister, Rashid Ahmad's statement of acquitting former Prime minister Benazir Bhutto in the nuclear proliferation case. Ultimately, he called for a parliamentary inquiry over on that issues, and questioned about the involvement of President General Pervez Musharraf in the proliferation case. In 2006, Haider was awarded PTV Awards for Best Playwright Serial award, which he received in a televised ceremony. In 2012, Haider was awarded with Sitara- e-Imtiaz for his services to nation's atomic bomb projects and his public policy efforts, which was conferred to him by the President Asif Zardari. In 2013, he was appointed as the "media coordinator" for the provincial government of Sindh. Pakistan Peoples Party leader and provincial secretary- general Taj Haider is likely to be elected unopposed to the Senate on the seat vacated by Dr Abdul Hafeez Shaikh. The Senate election is scheduled for 5 June and the last date to submit nominations is 22 May, According to provincial election commissioner, if no other candidate submits nomination forms then Taj Haider will be elected unopposed. ===Writing and philosophy=== Haider extensively writes on nuclear policy issues, left-wing ideas, literary and political philosophy. His recent writings have included the support of social democracy in the country and power of balance in each state institutions. On literary and political circles, he has written critic articles against the military dictatorship, specifically policies enforced by the conservative President General Zia-ul-Haq throughout the 1980s. ;Honors and awards *Sitara- e-Imtiaz (2012) *13th PTV Awards for Best Playwright Serial award (2006) ;Selected articles: *Haider, Taj. "CTBT Security Perspectives" Dawn Newspapers, 27 March 2000. *Haider, Taj. "Setting the PPP record straight", Express Tribune 2013. *Haider, Taj. "Why the PPP is boycotting the presidential election", 16 July 2013 ;Television plays *Jinhein Raaste Main Khabar Hui *Lab-e-Darya ==See also== *Pakistan Peoples Party *Left-wing politics *Pakistan Academy of Letters *Pakistan Mathematical Society *Pakistan and its Nuclear Deterrent Program ==References== ==External links== *Pakistan Peoples Party Category:Living people Category:1942 births Category:People from Kota, Rajasthan Category:Politicians from Karachi Category:Pakistani people of Rajasthani descent Category:University of Karachi alumni Category:Pakistani mathematicians Category:Pakistani scientists Category:Pakistan Peoples Party politicians Category:Pakistani television directors Category:Pakistani academics Category:Pakistani socialists Category:Government of Benazir Bhutto staffers and personnel Category:Pakistani political writers Category:Pakistani media personalities Category:Pakistani Marxists Category:Recipients of Sitara- i-Imtiaz Category:Pakistani philosophers Category:Pakistani television writers Category:Pakistani dramatists and playwrights Category:Pakistani anti-war activists Category:Pakistani anti-Iraq War activists Category:Pakistani senators (14th Parliament) 
