Tal Keinan (born in 1969) is an American-born Israeli entrepreneur and financier and the founder of Clarity Capital, a New York and Tel Aviv based investment management firm. He is a proponent of the vision of Israel as a major exporter of financial services, and has served in different policy forums in pursuit of this goal, including the 2007 Ariav Commission, a Bank of Israel-Finance Ministry task force on creating a global financial center in Israel. Keinan was named as a Young Global Leader of the World Economic Forum in 2010. ==Biography== Keinan was born in Miami, Florida and studied at Phillips Exeter Academy and the Georgetown School of Foreign Service before immigrating to Israel in 1990 and enlisting in the Israeli Air Force (IAF). For much of the decade, Keinan served as a fighter pilot, becoming the only new immigrant in recent history to have joined the ranks of the IAF Air Crew. He now serves in the IAF reserves with the rank of lieutenant colonel. Following his military service, Keinan received a BA from Georgetown School of Foreign Service and at Tel Aviv University and an MBA from Harvard Business School he then returned to Israel, serving in the early 2000s as a partner at Giza, an Israeli venture capital firm. ==Clarity Capital== Keinan is one of the founders of Israel's first full-spectrum asset management firm, Clarity Capital, whose mission is to play a leading role in forging an Israeli financial services industry of global standing, comparable to that of the Israeli technology industry. The firm was established by Keinan in 2005 with David Steinhardt and Jay Pomrenze to embrace opportunities unlocked by capital market reforms introduced by then finance minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Keinan is a speaker and writer on the Israeli and global economy and is a central figure in the bestselling book about Israel's economic growth, Start-up Nation. ==Other activity== Keinan is a social activist in areas of education, economic development, and conflict resolution. He is the Chairman of Koret Israel Economic Development Funds, a not-for-profit organization providing credit to small and micro businesses. Keinan serves on the Boards of Directors of the Steinhardt Foundation, Heseg Fund, and Reut Institute. He is also linked to the ongoing effort by Dr. Eugene Kandel, chairman of the Israeli Prime Minister's Council of Economic Advisors, to launch a world-class graduate school of finance in Israel. Keinan is among the few Israeli investors active in the Palestinian Authority. Keinan is author of God Is in the Crowd: Twenty-First-Century Judaism, an original and provocative blueprint for Judaism in the twenty-first century. Presented through the lens of Tal Keinan's unusual personal story, it is a sobering analysis of the threat to Jewish continuity. ==References== ==External links== * Radio interviews: **Tal Keinan: Financier & Former Air Force Pilot and Tal Keinan on the Price of Israel's Regional Economic Isolation on TLV1 **Analysis of Netanyahu Victory on "This Morning with Gordon Deal" * Huffington Post: Obama's Legacy: Arab- Israeli Peace, The Next Gaza War: Your Role * BizPortal: Tal Keinan on Economic Challenges & Investment Opportunities * For Jews in France, 2015 isn't the 1930s, Tablet magazine * The Marker: How to Build a Truly Global Team of Investment Professionals * Jerusalem Post: Hamas's Useful Idiots, Op- Ed by Tal Keinan, August 27, 2014 Category:1969 births Category:20th-century American businesspeople Category:American money managers Category:Israeli investors Category:Israeli philanthropists Category:American chief executives Category:Harvard Business School alumni Category:Phillips Exeter Academy alumni Category:School of Foreign Service alumni Category:Living people 
