Tanfeeth is a shared services company located in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. The company is a subsidiary of Emirates NBD. Maryam Bahlooq serves as the company's CEO and Abdulla Qassem is Tanfeeth's Chairman. Tanfeeth is the first large-scale shared services organization in the Gulf Cooperation Council. The company's name means "getting the job done" in Arabic. Tanfeeth was founded in November 2011. As of October 2018, the company has approximately 3200 employees. ==History== In November 2011 Emirates NBD, the largest bank by assets in the United Arab Emirates, established Tanfeeth, a fully owned subsidiary in an effort to improve its customer service and operational efficiency. Emirates NBD appointed Suhail Bin Tarraf as Tanfeeth's CEO. At the time, the company had 700 employees located in Dubai, United Arab Emirates and Sharjah, United Arab Emirates. Tanfeeth absorbed all of Emirate NBD's back office operational teams between 2011 and 2013, and signed three additional client deals in 2013. The company began providing call center management services for a government authority and recruitment services for a telecommunications business. Tanfeeth also began providing transformation and advisory services for a banking institution in Kuwait. In September 2013, Tanfeeth started offering specialized underwriting courses with intention to decrease skill shortages in the GCC's banking and insurance sectors. This formed part of Tanfeeth's learning and development platform that included more than fifty specialized skill training programs. ==Services== Tanfeeth handles the back-office operations teams for Emirates NBD Group, which includes: Emirates NBD Contact Center Operations, Emirates Islamic Contact Center Operations, Collections, Compliance Operations, Finance and Accounting, International Payments, Retail Credit Operations, Wholesale Banking Operations, Central Operations and Service, Human Resource Services, Logical Security and Procurement Operations. ==References== Category:Companies based in Dubai Category:Business services companies established in 2011 Category:Emirati companies established in 2011 
