Telkom University, also referred to by its acronym of Tel-U, is a private university located in Bandung, West Java, Indonesia. It was established in 2013 with four institutions, which were under Telkom Indonesia through its education-focused wing, Telkom Education Foundation (now Telkom Foundation), were merged to form the university. These four forming institutions were Telkom Institute of Technology (IT Telkom - Institut Teknologi Telkom), Telkom Institute of Management (IM Telkom - Institut Manajemen Telkom), Telkom Polytechnic (Politeknik Telkom), and the Telkom College of Art and Design Indonesia (STISI Telkom - Sekolah Tinggi Seni Rupa dan Desain Indonesia Telkom). The university, like its preceding institutions, maintains links with hundreds of companies, many of which involved in the telecommunications sector. The main campus site of Telkom University extends on the 48ha-area of Bandung Technoplex (BT-Plex), on Jalan Telekomunikasi - Terusan Buahbatu, Kabupaten Bandung. Other campus is located in Gegerkalong Hilir area, north of the city of Bandung, at the office area of PT. Telkom's Research and Development Center and Telkom Corporate University/Telkom Training Center. Telkom University was awarded as the number 1 best private University in Indonesia and 14 best University (Private and Public University) in Indonesia ==History== ===Telkom University=== Telkom University was established on August 14, 2013 by the Decree of Director General of Higher Education (Kemendikbud) number 309/E/0/2013. Telkom University is a private university established by Telkom Education Foundation. It was formed out of a merger of four private higher educations, namely Telkom Institute of Technology (founded as STT Telkom, 1990), Telkom Institute of Management (founded as STMB Telkom, 1990), Telkom Polytechnic (Politel, 2007), and Telkom College of Art and Design Indonesia (STISI Telkom, 2011). STT Telkom and STMB Telkom were established in 1990 on the initiative of Ir. Cacuk Sudarjanto, the Chief Director PT. Telkom, Indonesia's largest state-owned company in telecommunication. Both colleges were the first higher educations in Indonesia specializing in the field of telecommunications and information technology. Telkom University's campus in Bandung Technoplex is originally the integrated campus site developed for STT Telkom, which was officially opened by the President of Republic Indonesia, Suharto, on March 24, 1994. In the past, the area is the location of the second oldest radio stations in Indonesia owned by the Dutch colonial government. These radio stations then brought the historical news of the Indonesian Declaration of Independence on August 17, 1945 to the world. Telkom University was formed out of a merger of four institutions of higher education. The four institutions were Telkom Institute of Technology, Telkom Institute of Management, Telkom Polytechnics and Telkom Arts School. Each of the four schools formed a faculty inside the university. The plan to merge the four institutions were in existence from as early as 2011. It was initially planned that the four institutions would be merged into one university in 2012. But due to several problems the merge was delayed to 2013. Finally, in August 31, 2013, the Grand Launching of Telkom University was established by Professor M. Nuh, the Minister of Education and Culture, Republic Indonesia. ===IT Telkom=== Telkom Institute of Technology (IT Telkom) - formerly known as STT Telkom - is the first institution specializing in Indonesian studies program in the field of Information and Communications Technologies (ICT). Telkom is projected to prepare experts in the field of ICT, skilled and insightful business, in response to the demands of the rapidly growing ICT industry. Telkom Institute of Technology (IT Telkom) formerly known as Sekolah Tinggi Teknologi Telkom (STT Telkom). STT Telkom initiated the establishment of awareness Ir. Cacuk Sudarijanto that in 1990 when it served as a Director of PT. Telkom will be the rapid development of information and communication technologies must be balanced with the willingness of qualified human resources. Departing from the view that he, who by the Economic Observer referred to as the Father of Transformation Telkom, establishing STT Telkom. STT Telkom unveiled its foundation on Friday, September 28, 1990, in London Downstream Gegerkalong by the Minister of Tourism, Post and Telecommunications at the time, Mr. Susilo Soedarman. Since its establishment, under the auspices of IT Telkom Telkom Education Foundation (YPT). The purpose of establishing this campus is very rapidly to meet the need for experts in the telecommunications industry. PT Telkom is very interested in the institution, so that PT Telkom and provide full scholarships to the students of bond 1991 and 1992. The existence of climate change in the telecommunications industry and with the start of PT Telkom entered the era of going public, the scholarship program and bulk bond and subsequently terminated STT Telkom became an independent college. At the beginning stands, STT Telkom campus spread over three locations, namely Campus-1 in Jalan Soekarno Hatta, Campus-2 in Jalan Hilir Gegerkalong, and Campus-3 is located at Jalan Haji Hasan Mustafa Penhollow. In 1993 STT Telkom has its own campus on Canal Street Buahbatu Telecommunications (current location), and a year later all teaching and learning activities centered on the new campus. In the same year, STT Telkom Campus President Mr. Soeharto inaugurated on March 24, 1994. Occupying a land area of 48 hectares, the campus STT Telkom has good educational support facility with a beautiful arrangement of the environment, so the learning process takes place more conducive. STT Telkom improve organizational form into Telkom on November 20, 2007. In the process of merging into Telkom's University in 2013, Telkom was transformed into the Faculty of Engineering (FT) or Telkom Engineering School (TES). Subsequently, in 2014 the Faculty of Engineering developed into three faculties, namely: 1). Faculty of Electrical Engineering (FTE) or the School of Electrical Engineering (SEE), 2). Faculty of Industrial Engineering (FRI) or the School of Industrial Engineering (SIE), and 3). Faculty of Informatics (FIF) or the School of Computing (SC). ; Chairman of the Higher Colleges of Technology Telkom (STT Telkom): *Dr. Ir. Bambang Hidayat, DEA (1990-1995) *Dr. Ir. Taufik Hasan, DEA (1995-1998) *Prof. Dr. Ir. Andi Hakim Nasution (late) (1998-2001) *Ir. Harsono, M.Sc. (2001-2005) *Ir. Husni Amani, M.Sc., M.B.A. (2005-2007) ;Rector Telkom Institute of Technology (IT Telkom): *Ir. Husni Amani, M.Sc., M.B.A. (2007-2010) *Ir. Ahmad Tri Hanuranto, M.T. (2010-2013) ===IM Telkom=== Telkom Institute of Management (IM Telkom) has started its journey since 1990 with the name of the MBA-London, then in 1994 changed its name to the College of Management Bandung (STMB), and in 2004 again renamed the College of Business Management Telkom (Telkom STMB ). Transformation into Telkom Institute of Management (IM Telkom) occurred in 2008. campus MBA first-Bandung is Building H and I Telkom Training Center Complex located at 47 Lower Street Gegerkalong Bandung. Bandung is the organizer of the MBA-Master in Business Administration program first in West Java, predating later similar programs organized by public universities in Bandung. In its early years, the MBA- schooled Bandung fully adopt the system of the Asian Institute of Management (AIM) the Philippines, which was then known as the Harvard Business School Asia. When established, the professor of teaching and guiding the implementation of AIM MBA program until 1995. Given these conditions, in 1992 the MBA Bandung successful entry into the seven best business schools SWA magazine, together with IPPM, IPMI, Prasetya Mulya, UI, and ITB. Responding to government regulations about the management of the implementation of the MBA program in Indonesia, then in 1994, MBA-Bandung changing organizational form into High School by the name of London School of Management (STMB). With the status of high school, STMB changes the program into a program Mbanya Master of Management (MM). In addition, STMB also increasingly diversifying variant MMnya program, becoming the program Regular MM, MM Executive, and MM Cooperative Education. On the occasion of the first accreditation held by the government, MM STMB obtain accreditation program A (Superior). As the development of government regulation in order to not only hold high school graduate programs, coupled with the desire of the Board of Directors PT.Telkom (at that time occupied by AA Nasution) in order to take part in a world increasingly STMB higher education, in 1997 STMB organized programs stratum-1 (S-1/sarjana). Courses that opened in STMB at the time was the S-1 Business Management of Telecommunications and Informatics (MBTI). Public interest in this course continues to be accompanied by increased absorption of alumni STMB industry towards high enough. On the occasion of accreditation by the government in 2002, the S-1 STMB MBTI accreditation A. To provide a stronger identity in the field of telecommunications science business management, in 2004 STMB changed its name to the College of Business Management Telkom (Telkom STMB). This name change was followed by an increase in the capacity of the new admissions program MBTI S-1, in order to meet market demand. In addition, the program also adds a variant graduate program with MM Business Telecommunications Study (MM Biztel). Existence STMB stronger Telkom has prompted efforts to transform STMB Telkom Telkom Institute of Management (IM Telkom) in 2008. Transformation is characterized by the increase in courses organized by IM Telkom. New courses held since the year 2008 is a program of study: S-1 Communication Sciences, S-1 Visual Communication Design, the S-1 Accounting, Business Administration S-1, D-3 Marketing. This transformation is followed by the development of campus facilities, which was originally only located in Telkom Complex Training Center Road Gegerkalong Downstream, further expanded with Setiabudi Road campus. Campus activities at Jalan Setiabudi was discontinued after a move to campus BT-Plex. In the process of merging into Telkom's University in 2013, IM Telkom transformed into the Faculty of Economics and Business (FEB) or Telkom Economics and Business School (Tebs). Subsequently, in 2014, the Faculty of Economics and Business developed into two faculties, namely: 1). Faculty of Economics and Business (FEB) or the School of Economics and Business (SEB), and 2). Faculty of Communication and Business (FKB) or the School of Communications and Business (SCB). ;Executive Director of MBA Bandung: *Ir. Tjahjono Soerjodibroto, M.Sc. (1990-1994) *Ir. Retno S. Renggono, M.B.A. (1994-1997) *Drs. Nana Hernawan Marta, M.B.A. (1997) ;Chairman of the Sekolah Tinggi Manajemen Bisnis (STMB): *Drs. Nana Hernawan Marta, M.B.A. (1997-1999) *Ir. Bambang Baroto, M.B.A. (1999-2002) *Ir. Thomas Widjanarto, M.Sc. (2002-2005) *Dr. Ir. Adibroto Anton (2005-2006) ;Chairman of the Sekolah Tinggi Manajemen Bisnis Telkom Telkom (Telkom STMB): *Dr. Ir. Adibroto Anton (2006-2007) *Asep Suryana Natawiria, M.M., M.Sc. (2007-2008) ;Rector of Telkom Institute of Management (IM Telkom): *Dr. Asep Suryana Natawiria, M.M., M.Sc. (2008-2010) *Dr. Ir. Husni Amani, M.Sc., M.B.A. (2010-2013) ===Telkom Polytechnic=== Telkom Polytechnic course of history stems from two (2) training programs engaged in the field of ICT, namely: Professional Program STT Telkom, and Telkom NIIT & Training Center. Both training institutions are then merged to form a new higher education institutions engaged in the field of vocational education. On September 27, 2007, Telkom Polytechnic was inaugurated by the President Director of PT. Telekomunikasi Indonesia Tbk., Mr. Rinaldi Firmansyah. Faculty of Applied Science (FIT) / School of Applied Science (SAS). Telkom Polytechnic also fairly close cooperation with industry. At the end of 2012 Telkom Polytechnic renew the concept of Industrial Work activity, the students will be involved professionally in the industry and got the same treatment as well as regular employees. That is, students who complete the program will receive remuneration Industrial Work and other rights as an employee. Until the year 2013 more than 500 students have already absorbed by the industry in the Industrial Work program involving more than 20 companies in the telecommunications industry, banking, information systems, media, consumer goods, and one of the world's representative agency the International Labor Organization. Lecture facilities used were the work of technology development conducted by a team of internal Telkom Polytechnic, which consists of lecturers and students involved. Academic system built is able to steal one of the best public universities in London and also some other universities outside Java because it is known to have had academic system that is integrated and reliable. In the process of merging into Telkom's University in 2013, Telkom Polytechnic transformed into the Faculty of Applied Sciences (FIT) or Telkom Applied Science School (TASS). Subsequently, in 2014, naming Telkom Applied Science School (TASS) was changed to the School of Applied Science (SAS). ;Director of Telkom Polytechnic: *Ir. Ahmad Tri Hanuranto, M.T. (2007-2010) *Ir. Budi Sulistyo, M.T. (2010-2013) ===STISI Telkom=== High School of Art and Design or STISI Telkom Telkom Indonesia is one of the pioneer university in the field of Arts and Design. During the 23 years of existence, more than 1,200 alumni of the Visual Communication Design Studies, Interior Design, Product Design, Textile and Fashion Craft, who holds S.Ds. (Bachelor of Design), and Visual Arts who holds S.Sn. (Bachelor of Arts), have contributed significantly to the development of Indonesian Creative industries, through diverse portfolio of artwork and designs that are used in various industrial and construction sectors. STISI Bandung was established on 2 September 1990, founded by Drs. Usnadibrata, M.Sn. under the Education Foundation Mandiri Indonesia. At the beginning of its establishment in 1990, Bandung STISI organized three courses, namely Bachelor of Visual Communication Design, Textile and Fashion Craft and Interior Design. The addition of S1 (Bachelor's degree) courses of Product Design implemented in 1991 and Visual Arts in 1996. STISI In 2010 joined Telkom Education Foundation. In the process of merging into Telkom's University in 2013, STISI transformed into the Faculty of Creative Industries (FIK) or Telkom Creative Industries School (TCIS). Subsequently, in 2014, naming Telkom Creative Industries School (TCIS) was changed to the School of Creative Industries (SCI). ;Chairman of the High School of Art and Design Indonesia (Bandung STISI): *Drs. Usnadibrata, M.Sn. (1990-1999) *Prof. Cecelia R. Rochendi, S.Sn., M.Sn. (1999-2003) *Ir. Tengku Muda Aryadi, M.M. (2004-2006) *Imelda Tirra Usnadibrata-Furqan, SH, MM, M.Ed.M., M.Sc. (2007-2010) ;Chairman of the High School of Art and Design Indonesia Telkom (Telkom STISI): *Imelda Tirra Usnadibrata-Furqan, SH, MM, M.Ed.M., M.Sc. (2010-2013) ==Faculties== ===Telkom Engineering School=== Profile Telkom Engineering School (TES) formerly known as Sekolah Tinggi Teknologi Telkom (STTTelkom) was established on September 28, 1990 by Telkom Educational Foundation (YPT) and renamed into Institute of Technology Institut Teknologi Telkom on 2008 and then transformed into Telkom University on 2013. TES is the first institution in Indonesia which is specialized in the field of Informiation and Communication Technologies (ICT) or infocomm. Facility As a University in the field of Engineering, the learning process is also taking place in the laboratory. Currently. TES has 4 laboratorIes spread out in four (4) faculties i.e. Faculty of Electro and Communications, Industrial Engineering. lntormationTechnology and Science. Undergraduate programs: #Electrical Engineering #Computer Engineering #Telecommunications Engineering #Informatics Engineering #Industrial Engineering #Information Systems #Engineering Physics #Computational Science/ Computer Science Graduate programs: #Telecommunications Engineering #Informatics Engineering #Industrial Engineering === Telkom Economics and Business School === Profile The journey of Telkom Economic & Business School (TEBS) formerly known as Telkom Institute of Management began in 1990 with the name MBA Bandung which later became the Bandung School of Management (STMB) in 1994. Then it was renamed Telkom School of Business Management (SMBT) in 2004, and eventually transformed into Telkom Institute of Management (IM Telkom) in 2008, finally in 2013 transformed into Telkom Economic & Business School (TEBS) of Telkom University. TEBS is one of Telkom University faculty major in Economic & Business and Telkom University was managed by Telkom Education Foundation (YPT). YPTs board of advisers in ex officio is directors PT. Telecommunications Indonesia, Tbk (PT Telkom). TEBS was established as a form of responsibility of PT. Telkom to be a Good Corporate Citizen that wants to contribute in the effort to brighten the nation of Indonesia. Undergraduate programs : #Business Management of Telecommunications and Informatics(Accreditation A) #International ICT Business(Accreditation A) #Accounting Graduate program : Management === School of Communication Business === #Business Administration (Accreditation A) #Communication Science (Accreditation A) #Digital Public Relations === School of Applied Science === Currently in the School of Applied Sciences, there are seven study program with Diploma levels of education (D3) include: * Computerized Accounting (Accreditation A) * Information Management (Accreditation A) * Computer Engineering (Accreditation A) * Marketing Management (Accreditation B) * Informatics Engineering (Accreditation A) * Telecommunication Engineering (Accreditation A) * Hospitality (Accreditation Process) * Multimedia System (Accreditation Process) In order to support the research activities, we have also several groups of faculty expertise include: * Installation Operation & Maintenance of Telecommunication * Interactive System * IT Governance * Accounting & Information Systems in Enterprises * Programming & Interactive Multimedia * Commerce Management * Embedded and Network Systemshttp://sas.telkomuniversity.ac.id/en/ === School of Creative Industries === The School of Creative Industries has five study program with bachelor's degree level (Stratum 1/S1) which includes: * Visual Arts (Accreditation A) * Craft (Accreditation A) * Product Design (Accreditation A) * Interior Design (Accreditation A) * Visual Communication Design (Accreditation A) ==References== Category:Universities in Indonesia Category:Educational institutions established in 2013 Category:Buildings and structures in Bandung Category:Universities in West Java 
