Fragment of the inscription at the Israel Museum. The Temple Warning inscription, also known as the Temple Balustrade inscription or the Soreg inscription, is an inscription that hung along the balustrade outside the Sanctuary of the Second Temple in Jerusalem. Two of these tablets have been found. A complete tablet was discovered in 1871 by Charles Simon Clermont- Ganneau, in the ad-Dawadariya school just outside the al-Atim Gate to the Temple Mount, and published by the Palestine Exploration Fund.Charles Clermont-Ganneau: Une stele du temple de Jerusalem. In: Revue archeologique. Band 23, 1872, S. 214-234 (online), 290-296 (online): quote: "...on s'engage sous une assez longue voute ogivale, a l'extremite de laquelle on remarque, a main droite, la porte Bab-el-Atm, par ou l'on a sur la mosquee d'Omar une merveilleuse echappee. A main gauche, et faisant face a cette porte, on voit, donnant sur un petit cimetiere musulman, une sorte de baie grillee, pratiquee dans un mur construit en gros blocs a bossages (a forte projection) et flanque d'une espece de contrefort du meme appareil. Le cimetiere ne contient que quelques tombes de cheikhs morts en odeur de saintete, et appartenant probablement a la Medrese (ecole superieure) qui s'elevait jadis derriere ce mur d'aspect si caracteristique... J'arrivai ainsi jusqu'a la Medrese, ou j'entrai, introduit par un des habitants qui fit d'abord quelques difficultes a cause de la presence du harim, mais dont il ne me fut pas malaise de faire taire les scrupules. Une fois dans la vaste cour decrite plus haut, je fixai.d'abord mon attention sur les deux tarikhs arabes, qui, du reste, sont deja connus, puis je commencai, suivant la methode qui m'a toujours reussi, a examiner de pres, et pour ainsi dire bloc par bloc, les constructions adjacentes. Arrive a la petite voute faisant face au grand liwan, je decouvris tout a coup, presque au ras du sol, deux caracteres grecs graves sur un bloc formant l'angle du mur sur lequel reposait la petite voute: 0 C'etait evidemment la fin d'une ligne qui s'enfoncait verticalement dans la terre. Frappe du bel aspect graphique de ces lettres, je commencai, avec l'aide d'un des musulmans habitant la Medrese, a gratter et creuser pour degager quelques autres caracteres. Apres quelques minutes de travail, je vis apparaitre un magnifique 1 de la belle epoque classique, comme jamais il ne m'avait ete donne d'en relever dans les inscriptions que j'avais decouvertes jusqu'a ce jour a Jerusalem. Evidemment, j'avais affaire a un texte important par sa date, sinon par son contenu; je me remis a l'oeuvre avec une ardeur facile a comprendre. Le musulman qui m'aidait, s'etant, sur ces entrefaites, procure une fas ou pioche chez un voisin, la fouille put etre poussee plus activement. Je vis successivement apparaitre les lettres El, dont la premiere, l'epsilon, confirmait la valeur epigraphique du 2; puis le mot , etranger, que je reconnus sur-le-champ. Ce mot me remit aussitot en memoire le passage de Josephe qui parle d'inscriptions destinees a interdire aux Gentils l'acces du Temple; mais je n'osais croire a une trouvaille aussi inesperee, et je m'appliquai a chasser de mon esprit ce rapprochement seduisant, qui continua toutefois de me poursuivre jusqu'au moment ou j'arrivai a la certitude. Cependant la nuit etait venue; je dus, pour ne pas exciter les soupcons des habitants de la Medrese par une insistance inexplicable pour eux, suspendre le travail. Je fis reboucher le trou et je partis tres-trouble de ce que je venais d'entrevoir. Le lendemain, de grand matin, je revins avec les instruments necessaires, et je fis attaquer vigoureusement la fouille. Apres quelques heures d'un travail que je ne perdais pas de l'oeil, et pendant lequel je vis naitre un a un et copiai avec des emotions croissantes les caracteres de la belle inscription que j'ai l'honneur de soumettre aujourd'hui a l'Academie, le bloc et toute sa face ecrite etaient mis au jour." Following the discovery of the inscription, it was taken by the Ottoman authorities, and it is currently in the Istanbul Archaeology Museums. A partial fragment of a less well made version of the inscription was found in 1936 by J. H. Iliffe during the excavation of a new road outside Jerusalem's Lions' Gate; it is held in the Israel Museum.Israel Museum, ID number: IAA 1936-989 ==Inscription== The inscription was a warning to pagan visitors to the temple not to proceed further. Both Greek and Latin inscriptions on the temple's balustrade served as warnings to pagan visitors not to proceed under penalty of death.Bickerman, Elias J. "The Warning Inscriptions of Herod's Temple"' The Jewish Quarterly Review, vol. 37, no. 4, 1947, pp. 387-405. Two authentic tablets have been found, one complete, and the other a partial fragment with missing sections, but with letters showing signs of the red paint that had originally highlighted the text.Llewelyn, Stephen R., and Dionysia Van Beek. "Reading the Temple Warning as a Greek Visitor". Journal for the Study of Judaism in the Persian, Hellenistic, and Roman Period, vol. 42, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1-22. It was described by the Palestine Exploration Fund in 1872 as being "very nearly in the words of Josephus".DE LATINISMEN IN HET GRIEKS VAN HET NIEUWE TESTAMENT, p.15: dia toutou proionton epi to deuteron ieron druphaktos peribebleto lithinos, tripekhus men upsos, panu de kharientos dieirgasmenos: en auto de eistekesan ex isou diastematos stelai ton tes agneias prosemainousai nomon ai men Ellenikois ai de Romaikois grammasin medena allophulon entos tou agiou parienai (BJ 5.2.2, SS193-194) [transliterated: dia toutou proionton epi to defteron ieron dryfaktos perivevlito lithinos, tripichys men ypsos, pany de charientos dieirgasmenos: en afto de eistikesan ex isou diastimatos stilai ton tis agneias prosimainousai nomon ai men Ellinikois ai de Romaikois grammasin midena allofylon entos tou agiou parienai]; Also at Perseus The inscription uses three terms referring to temple architecture:Bickerman, 1947, pages 387-389: "To begin with, there are three terms referring to the architectural complex of the Temple. To ieron, 'holy place', is the designation of the consecrated area, to which the fore-court led. This area was called by the Jews 'sacred', mikdash (hamikdaSH). The word ieron was common in this sense in Greek and applied to pagan cults. For this reason it was avoided by the Alexandrian translators of the Scripture who use the term to agion in referring to the Temple of Jerusalem. But after the Maccabean victory, the Jews had less scruples about using a technical term from Greek heathenism. On the other hand, the word to agion which had become fashionable for Oriental holy places, was no longer a distinctive term in Herod's time. Accordingly, Philo and Josephus use both words, ieron and agion to designate the Temple of Herod. The peribolos was the wall which encompassed the holy terrace within the outer court. Josephus, Philo and the Septuagint use this Greek word, technical in this connotation, to describe the enclosure of the Temple. The trupsaktos, the Soreg in the Mishna, was a stone barrier which stretched across the outer court to protect the flights of stairs leading up to the inner court. As we said, the warning inscriptions were fixed on this rail." * To hieron (To ieron), "holy place", the sacred area, to which the forecourt led * Peribolou (peribolos), a wall encompassing the holy terrace within the outer court * Tryphaktou (truphaktos), a stone barrier across the outer court ==Translation== The tablet bears the following inscription in Koine Greek: {| class="wikitable" style="text-align:center" ! Original Greek || In minuscles with diacritics || TransliterationNote: The original text is written in scriptio continua; the "[-]" symbol in the transliteration represents the Greek words which are broken across two lines || TranslationDiscovery of a Tablet from Herod's Temple |-- | METhENAALLOGENEEISPO REUESThAIENTOSTOUPE RITOIERONTRUPhAKTOUKAI PERIBOLOUOSDANLE PhThEEAUTOIAITIOSES TAIDIATOEKsAKOLOU ThEINThANATON || Methena allogene eispo- reuesthai entos tou pe- ri to ieron truphaktou kai peribolou. Os d' an le- phthe, eautoi aitios es- tai dia to exakolou- thein thanaton. || Methena allogene eispo[-] reuesthai entos tou pe[-] ri to hieron tryphaktou kai peribolou. Hos d'an le[-] phthe heautoi aitios es[-] tai dia to exakolou[-] thein thanaton. || No stranger is to enter within the balustrade round the temple and enclosure. Whoever is caught will be himself responsible for his ensuing death. |-- |} ==Forgeries== A copy of the inscription at the Museum of Roman Civilization in Rome. Several forgeries were promptly prepared following the 1871 discovery. Clermont-Ganneau was shown a similar artifact at the Monastery of St Saviour, which was later shown to be a forgery created by Martin Boulos. ==See also== *Acts 21:27-29 ==References== ==External references== * * * * Millard, Alan, Discoveries from the Time of Jesus. Oxford: Lion Publishing, 1990. * Roitman, Aldopho, Envisioning the Temple, Jerusalem: The Israel Museum, 2003. * Elias J. Bickerman, "The Warning Inscriptions of Herod's Temple," The Jewish Quarterly Review, New Ser., Vol. 37, No. 4. (Apr., 1947), pp. 387-405. * Matan Orian, "The Purpose of the Balustrade in the Herodian Temple," Journal for the Study of Judaism 51 (2020), pp. 1-38. Category:1st-century BC works Category:1st- century works Category:1871 archaeological discoveries Category:Second Temple Category:Roman-era Greek inscriptions Category:Archaeological artifacts Category:Judaic inscriptions 
