The Terekty River (, ), also known under the Sinified spelling Tielieketi (), is a small river that flows from China to Kazakhstan. In its lower course the river is also known as the Kusak (, , ). Along most of its course, the river flows through the very sparsely populated mountainous terrain of the southern part of Xinjiang's Yumin County; by the time it crosses the China-Kazakhstan border and enters a flat desert east of Lake Zhalanashkol, its bed is usually dry, with little water ever reaching Lake Zhalanashkol. The Terekty is mainly known as the site of a Sino-Soviet border conflict that occurred in August 1969. ==Geography== According to topographic maps, the Terekty rises in the Kertau or Barlik (Ba Er Lu Ke ) Mountains at around The river's source area can be seen e.g. on this Soviet topo map about 2 km NE from Peak Kertau (which is marked with its elevation, 3282 m). After flowing to the south for some 20 km, and receiving several tributaries at around , the Terekty turns west and flows in a narrow valley until it reaches the Alakol-Zhalanashkol depression. Once entering the plain east of Lake Zhalanashkol at around , the river forms a large alluvial fan. In this area, the water flow is seasonal, the river bed being dry most of the year. The (usually dry) "delta" of the Terekty (Kusak) reaches the northeastern corner of Lake Zhalanashkol around . A joint Sino- Kazakh boundary commission which demarcated the modern China-Kazakhstan border (defined by a bilateral treaty signed in 1994) installed two border monuments on both sides of the Terekty (Kusak) River to mark the exact line of the border as it crosses the river. According to the commission's protocol, granite monument no. 241/1, installed on the right (northern) side of the river is situated at ; reinforced concrete monument No. 242, on the river left (southern) side is at ; the distance between the two monuments is 285.8 m.O ratifikatsii Protokola mezhdu Pravitel'stvom Respubliki Kazakhstan i Pravitel'stvom Kitaiskoi Narodnoi Respubliki o demarkatsii linii kazakhstansko- kitaiskoi gosudarstvennoi granitsy. Zakon Respubliki Kazakhstan ot 4 iiulia 2003 goda, N 469. ("On the ratification of the Protocol agreed by the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Government of the People's Republic of China on the demarcation of the line of the Kazakhstan-China international border. Law No. 469 of the Republic of Kazakhstan. July 4, 2003") ==Meaning of the name, and its other uses== Terekty () is a Kazakh adjective derived from terek (). Thus, "Terekty River" () means "Poplar River" (compare the Baiyang River, elsewhere in Xinjiang, whose name means the same in Chinese). "Terekty" is a fairly common place name in Kazakhstan, used (by itself or in combination with a modifier) for a number of villages, at least one other river, and a mountain pass elsewhere in the country. ==Notes== China-Kazakhstan border Category:Rivers of Xinjiang Category:Rivers of Kazakhstan 
