The Night Comes for Us is a 2018 Indonesian action thriller film written and directed by Timo Tjahjanto. It was originally conceived as a screenplay and then adapted into a graphic novel, before finally being released as a film. In December 2014, Tjahjanto confirmed he was working with Indonesian artist hub Glitch Network to adapt his original screenplay into comic form. The film stars Iko Uwais, Joe Taslim, Julie Estelle, Sunny Pang, Zack Lee and Shareefa Daanish. The film is based on a top organized crime enforcer (Taslim) who decides to turn his back on his former life as a killer to rescue a young girl. The crime syndicate sends in a rising gang prospect (Uwais) and legions of thugs to eliminate the enforcer and the young girl. The film was released to positive reviews, with critics praising the action and Uwais, Estelle and Taslim's performances, although the excessive violence was criticized. The film premiered at Fantastic Fest on 22 September 2018. Four days later, it was announced that Netflix had acquired the distribution rights, and was released worldwide on 19 October 2018. ==Plot== Ito is one of six elite enforcers for the South East Asian Triad, known as the Six Seas (Indonesian: enam laut). After massacring a village because a few villagers had stolen Triad drugs, Ito discovers the last survivor, a young girl named Reina. Ito turns on the Triad soldiers present and kills them. He returns to his childhood home of Jakarta and hides Reina in his ex-girlfriend Shinta's apartment. Shinta treats his wounds and calls in Fatih, who used to be in a gang with Ito. Fatih moves them to his own apartment and brings in his cousin Wisnu, and the last member of the old gang, Bobby, a drug addict. He also arranges for Ito and Reina to get new passports. Arian is another member of the old gang, but has moved to Macau, where he is running a club for the Triad. He is shown slaughtering other crooks because they beat up one of his waitresses. Another Six Seas, Chien Wu, calls him in to help kill Ito. Ito goes to an old acquaintance, Yohan, to get money he left behind in Jakarta. Yohan is also connected with the Triad, and a fight ensues. Ito kills Yohan's men, but Yohan makes a phone call that brings in corrupt cops. They gun down Yohan and capture Ito. Bobby discovers Yohan's thugs entering Fatih's building. He gets Shinta to safety and returns to help Fatih and Wisnu fight. They are initially successful, but Triad enforcers led by Elena and Alma arrive. They kill the last of Yohan's men, Bobby, and Wisnu. Arian intervenes before Alma can kill Fatih, knocking her unconscious. Fatih deduces that Arian told Yohan and the Triad where he lived, and refuses further help. More Triad ambush Fatih and Reina in the garage. Fatih has Reina hide while he distracts them. He is killed, but the Triad are all killed by a mysterious woman. Ito frees himself and returns to Fatih's. Reina finds him and they relocate to another apartment where they bond. The mysterious woman, known as The Operator, arrives and fights Ito. After she wins, she talks to him instead of killing him, then disappears. Chien Wu meets with Arian, giving him one last chance to kill Ito, and offering him Ito's place in the Six Seas. In a flashback, it is revealed that Ito and Arian, working out of the warehouse the Triad are using in the present day, entered the Triad together. The Operator returns to Ito and reveals that her mission is to kill the Six Seas, including Ito, Chien Wu and their boss. Ito commits to killing Chien Wu if The Operator will protect Reina. Ito travels to the warehouse and slaughters the Triad henchmen there. Meanwhile, The Operator kills the henchmen who arrive at the apartment, ending with Alma and Elena. Arian takes out a sniper who was about to kill Ito, and the two talk before starting their fight. Both are severely wounded. Ito finally gains the upper hand, but leaves instead of killing Arian. Chien Wu arrives and insults Arian, who tries to shoot him, but finds that he is out of bullets. Chien has six people led by Arian's former assistant execute Arian, presumably hinting that his assistant is the new Six Seas. The Operator guides Reina to Ito and leaves. Ito puts Reina on a departing ship but does not board himself. After they wave goodbye, Chien Wu and more Triad henchmen arrive. Ito grins and drives his car toward them as they open fire. ==Cast== * Joe Taslim as Ito * Iko Uwais as Arian * Asha Kenyeri Bermudez as Reina * Sunny Pang as Chien Wu * Salvita Decorte as Shinta * Abimana Aryasatya as Fatih * Zack Lee as Bobby * as Wisnu * Julie Estelle as The Operator * Dian Sastrowardoyo as Alma * Hannah Al Rashid as Elena * as the Triad's sniper * as Aliong * Morgan Oey as Arian's assistant * as the Night Handler * as Yohan * as Captain * Putri Indah Mayang Sari as Reina's mother * Ajat Sudrajat as Reina's father ==Production== In September 2014, pre-production on the film was halted and three months later Tjahjanto confirmed he was adapting the script into a graphic novel. ==Release== RADiUS-TWC has acquired North American distribution rights in 2014 prior to the beginning of production, but allegations against the label's owner Harvey Weinstein, and its parent company The Weinstein Company about to liquidate its entire assets to Lantern Entertainment, they sold the entire rights to Netflix. The trailer was released on 10 October 2018. The film was released on 19 October 2018. ===Critical response=== On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 88% based on 26 reviews, with a weighted average of 7.2/10. The website's consensus reads, "A bloody thrill ride designed to test the limits of more squeamish viewers, The Night Comes for Us wields a stylishly violent, action-packed punch." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 69 out of 100 based on reviews from 6 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews." Richard Kuipers of Variety wrote: "This cartoonish cavalcade of carnage potently reunites The Raid stars Joe Taslim and Iko Uwais as former friends on a corpse-strewn collision course." ==References== ==External links== * * * * Category:2018 action thriller films category:Indonesian-language Netflix original films Category:Indonesian-language films Category:Mandarin-language films Category:English-language films Category:Indonesian action films Category:Indonesian thriller films Category:Crime graphic novels Category:Indonesian films Category:2018 martial arts films Category:Silat films Category:Neo-noir Category:Indonesian martial arts films 
