Theodore "Ted" Swetz (born March 21, 1953) is an American actor, theatre director, and educator.Bautista, Joann. "Ted Swetz kicks off Shakespeare Fest with Love's Labour's Lost." The Daily Iowan. June 10, 2010. He currently serves as the Head of Acting at UMKC Theatre, an academic department of the University of Missouri-Kansas City.UMKC Theatre. "Faculty Bios: Acting" Accessed at http://www.umkctheatre.org/faculty_bios.html#swetz on 10/9/13.Houx, Kellie. "UMKC Presents Classic Adult Fairy Tale 'The King Stag'". KC Studio. Oct. 22, 2010 ==Early life== Swetz was born and raised in Yonkers, New York, and completed his B.A. at Lehman College in 1976 in New York City.Trussell, Robert. '"The magic of comedy." The Kansas City Star. Dec. 15, 1999. During his undergraduate career as a performer, Swetz acted in multiple productions at the New York Shakespeare Festival, performing at both Central Park and Lincoln Center."Classical Actor and M.F.A. Director Theodore Swetz '76 Discovered the World at Lehman." Lehman Today. Fall 2010-Winter 2011. Following graduation, Swetz continued his study of acting and theatrical production under such major American stage luminaries as Stella Adler, Phoebe Brand, and Morris Carnovsky, all of whom served as members of the influential Group Theatre founded in New York during the early 1930s.Houx, Kellie. "UMKC Presents Classic Adult Fairy Tale 'The King Stag'". KC Studio. Oct. 22, 2010. ==Career== In 1980, Swetz began work as an actor with the American Players Theatre (APT), helping to open the company in Spring Green, Wisconsin, and later acting, teaching, and directing there for almost a decade.Bautista, Joann. "Ted Swetz kicks off Shakespeare Fest with Love's Labour's Lost." The Daily Iowan. June 10, 2010. During founder Randall Duk Kim's leave of absence in 1988, Swetz took on a two-year position as assistant artistic director of the company under artistic director Anne Occhiogrosso.Jaques, Damien. "A familiar face will be missing from Spring Green stage this year." The Milwaukee Journal. May 6, 1990. He announced his resignation from the APT in 1989, and left the company in 1990, in order to begin teaching at University of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC). While in Kansas City, Swetz served as an artistic associate of the Missouri Repertory Theatre (now the Kansas City Repertory Theatre) while simultaneously working as an instructor at UMKC.Taylor, Rachael. "Swetz got his Mojo workin'" University News. Feb. 8, 1999. After over a decade of performing in the Kansas City area, Swetz accepted a position as associate professor of acting and directing at Binghamton University and returned to the New York area.Trussell, Robert. "A happy/sad Ted Swetz heading to New York" The Kansas City Star. Jul. 1, 2001. After a time as a member the Binghamton University faculty, Swetz eventually, after accepting the position of Patricia McIlrath Endowed Chair in Theatre Arts in Acting at UMKC, returned to the Kansas City area in order to serve as Head of UMKC Theatre's Master of Fine Arts acting program."Project Playwright to Provide Local Playwrights with a REAL Challenge." KC Studio. Apr. 11, 2001. Swetz's regional directing and acting credits includes productions with the Unicorn Theatre, the Commonweal Theatre Company, the Kansas City Repertory Theatre, the Kansas City Actors Theatre, the Coterie Theatre, the Nebraska Repertory Theatre, the Heart of America Shakespeare Festival, and the Riverside Shakespeare Festival, where Swetz was elected to serve as an artistic associate.UMKC Theatre. "Faculty Bios: Acting" Accessed at http://www.umkctheatre.org/faculty_bios.html#swetz on 10/9/13. ==References== Category:1953 births Category:Living people Category:People from Yonkers, New York Category:American male stage actors Category:American theatre directors Category:University of Missouri faculty Category:Lehman College alumni 
