Theodore Roosevelt, Rough Rider is a bronze sculpture by American artist Alexander Phimister Proctor, located in the South Park Blocks of Portland, Oregon in the United States. The equestrian statue was completed in 1922 and depicts Theodore Roosevelt as the leader of the cavalry regiment that fought during the Spanish-American War called the Rough Riders. ==Description and history== Detail of the sculpture, 2009 Theodore Roosevelt, Rough Rider is an equestrian statue designed by American sculptor Alexander Phimister Proctor (1860-1950). The bronze sculpture depicts Theodore Roosevelt, former President of the United States, as the leader of the cavalry regiment called the Rough Riders, who fought during the Spanish-American War. According to the Regional Arts & Culture Council, which administers the work, "Proctor took great care in accurately depicting Roosevelt as a symbol of American determination, success, and strength and as a bridge back to the Wild West." The statue is located in Portland's South Park Blocks, along Southwest Park Avenue between Southwest Jefferson and Madison Streets. It measures x x and is mounted to a base that measures long x high x wide. The memorial was commissioned after Roosevelt's death. Completed in 1922, the sculpture was cast in Brooklyn, New York and was shipped by sea via the Panama Canal to avoid cutting the work into pieces. Henry Waldo Coe, a friend and hunting partner of Roosevelt's, donated the statue to the City of Portland. Calvin Coolidge, then Vice President of the United States, was present at the statue's dedication. The statue's condition was deemed "treatment needed" by the Smithsonian Institution's "Save Outdoor Sculpture!" program in April 1993. It was toppled by demonstrators during the Indigenous Peoples Day of Rage in October 2020, along with the nearby statue of Abraham Lincoln, in what Portland police declared a riot. ==See also== * 1922 in art * List of equestrian statues in the United States * List of monuments and memorials removed during the George Floyd protests * Rough Riders Memorial (1907), Arlington National Cemetery ==References== ==External links== * Category:1922 establishments in Oregon Category:1922 sculptures Category:Bronze sculptures in Oregon Roosevelt, Theodore Category:Equestrian statues in Oregon Category:Military monuments and memorials in the United States Category:Monuments and memorials removed during the George Floyd protests Category:Outdoor sculptures in Portland, Oregon Category:Calvin Coolidge Category:Sculptures of men in Oregon Category:South Park Blocks Category:Statues by Alexander Phimister Proctor in Oregon Category:Statues in Portland, Oregon Category:Statues of Theodore Roosevelt Category:Vandalized works of art in Oregon 
