Thomas W. Harnisch (born January 16, 1947) is a former Democratic member of the Wisconsin State Senate. He represented the state's 31st Senate District from 1975 to 1983. ==Early life== Born in La Crosse, Wisconsin, Harnisch graduated from Gale-Ettrick High School. He earned a bachelor's degree from University of Wisconsin-Madison and a law degree from University of Minnesota Law School.Wisconsin Blue Book 1981-1982, Biographical Sketch of Thomas W. Harnisch ==Wisconsin Senate== Harnisch took interest in higher education and conservation during his two terms in the Senate. He crafted legislation creating the University of Wisconsin School of Veterinary Medicine "2 Vow to Fight for Vet School," Milwaukee Sentinel, January 16, 1979SVM Celebrates 30 Years and was one of the leaders in creating the Robert M. La Follette School of Public Affairs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison."La Follette School Urged as Tribute," Milwaukee Journal, December 9, 1982 He also helped create a graduate program in energy analysis and policy at the University of Wisconsin- Madison."EAP Program History" Harnisch authored the Wisconsin Farmland Preservation Act,"State Senator Tom Harnisch Reports: Harnisch Introduces Farm Tax Relief Measures," The Blair Press, February 17, 1977 a state program designed to preserve farmland, provide property tax relief to farmers, and prevent soil erosion.President's Commission on Americans Outdoors, Americans Outdoors: The Legacy, The Challenge, with Case Studies, p. 224 He was the architect of the Wisconsin Conservation Corps, a conservation and youth employment program modeled after the Civilian Conservation Corps. Harnisch introduced the legislation in 1981, which was vetoed by Governor Lee S. Dreyfus. The bill was reintroduced by Thomas A. Loftus and signed into law in 1983.President's Commission on Americans Outdoors, Americans Outdoors: The Legacy, The Challenge, with Case Studies, p. 372 The program remained active until 2003.Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development "Wisconsin Conservation Corps 1983-2003 20 years of service to Wisconsin" He was also an early proponent of state policies to encourage recycling."State Senator Tom Harnisch Reports: Mandatory Deposit Legislation," The Blair Press, February 3, 1977 ==Post-Senate activities== Harnisch remained active in politics as Wisconsin co-chair of the 1988 presidential campaign of Al Gore, later as a Gore delegate at the 1988 Democratic National Convention.Wisconsin Blue Book 1989-90, p. 902 He was long affiliated with the Wisconsin Towns Association later in his career. He is married with five children and resides in Neillsville, Wisconsin. ==Notes== Category:1947 births Category:Living people Category:People from Neillsville, Wisconsin Category:Politicians from La Crosse, Wisconsin Category:University of Wisconsin-Madison alumni Category:University of Minnesota Law School alumni Category:Wisconsin lawyers Category:Wisconsin Democrats Category:Wisconsin state senators 
