Thorn Hill is a historic home located near Lexington, Rockbridge County, Virginia. It was built in 1792, and is a two-story, five bay, brick I-house dwelling. It has a side gable roof, interior end chimneys with corbelled caps, and a two-story, one-bay wing. The front facade features a colossal tetrastyle portico with Doric order columns. The property includes the contributing log smokehouse, frame kitchen, frame servants house and loom house, and barns and farm outbuildings. Thorn Hill was the home of Col. John Bowyer, a central figure in Rockbridge County's formative years. and Accompanying photo It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1975. The property has historically been closely associated with nearby Washington and Lee University (W&L;). In 1782, Bowyer was appointed one of the first trustees of Liberty Hall Academy, which eventually became W&L.;. John Robinson, a principal benefactor of Washington College, and Judge John Brockenbrough, founder of the W&L; Law School, lived at Thorn Hill. More recently, Thorn Hill was a dairy farm, and the house itself largely fell into disrepair. In 2004, Bill Johnston and Paul Elliott bought Thorn Hill, spending more than $1 million restoring the property and adding various amenities, including a large pottery studio where the original kitchen (which was built away from the main house to prevent the main house from burning down in the event of a fire) once stood. They also added a scenic driveway and lush gardens. In 2008, the pair attempted to sell the property. Unfortunately the house went on the market the week before the collapse of Bear Stearns. Over the next several years, they kept cutting the price without attracting a buyer. In 2013, the owners decided to auction the house. Current Washington and Lee Trustee Bennett L. Ross and his wife Alyson Moore Ross were the high bidders during the auction, stating that they "...were interested in buying Thorn Hill because of its ties to Washington and Lee." ==References== ==External links== *Thorn Hill, Southwest of Lexington, off VA Route 251, Lexington, Lexington, VA: 13 photos and 1 photo caption page at Historic American Buildings Survey *Thorn Hill, Detached Kitchen, Southwest of Lexington, off VA Route 251, Lexington, Lexington, VA: 1 photo and 1 photo caption page at Historic American Buildings Survey *Thorn Hill, Dependency, Southwest of Lexington, off VA Route 251, Lexington, Lexington, VA: 1 photo and 1 photo caption page at Historic American Buildings Survey *Thorn Hill, Smokehouse, Southwest of Lexington, off VA Route 251, Lexington, Lexington, VA: 1 photo and 1 photo caption page at Historic American Buildings Survey Category:Historic American Buildings Survey in Virginia Category:Houses on the National Register of Historic Places in Virginia Category:Houses completed in 1792 Category:Houses in Rockbridge County, Virginia Category:National Register of Historic Places in Rockbridge County, Virginia Category:1792 establishments in Virginia 
