Thor's Hammer is a motion-based 3D dark ride at the Tusenfryd theme park in Norway. Themed after Norse mythology, the ride combines motion-based ride vehicles by ETF Ride Systems with 3D projections and physical scenery by P&P; Projects. The ride opened in June 2013 as a replacement for the Vikingtoktet motion simulator attraction which closed five years prior. Aside from a 3D cinema, Thor's Hammer is the only dark ride at Tusenfryd. It was nominated for a European Star Award in 2013. ==History== In late 2008, Tusenfryd closed its Vikingtoktet motion simulator attraction which was located inside a cave. With a indoor area now vacant, park officials spent two years planning what a replacement attraction might be. In October 2012, Project Mjolner was announced by the park. Mjolner is the hammer of Thor, the Norse god of thunder. P&P; Projects was contracted to design and build the ride, with a motion-based ride system being developed by ETF Ride Systems. After eight months of design and construction, Thor's Hammer officially opened to the public on June 22, 2013. Aside from the park's Alterface 3D Cinema, Nightmare, Thor's Hammer is Tusenfryd's only dark ride. ==Experience== Riders enter a cave to join the queue for Thor's Hammer. Once riders have boarded a vehicle it departs the station. It navigates along a track through eleven scenes consisting of physical scenery and ten 3D screens. Pieces of physical scenery are distributed between the 3D screens to minimise the effects of transitting between the screens. The ride's story is a prequel to the Norwegian mythological story Ragnarok, a battle where Thor and his half-brother Loki are killed. Riders are tasked to retrieve Thor's hammer, which Loki has stolen. Throughout the ride, other mythological beings including Fenrir, a monstrous wolf; Surtr, a giant; and Jormungandr, a sea serpent make appearances. One cycle of the ride lasts approximately four minutes. ==Ride system== The ride system used on Thor's Hammer is a first-of-its-kind system developed by ETF Ride Systems. At the 2012 IAAPA Trade Show in Orlando, Florida, ETF showcased a prototype trackless motion-based ride system, confirming a track-based version would be installed at Tusenfryd. The eleven six-seater vehicles on Thor's Hammer each feature two degrees of freedom: pitching and rolling. The vehicles can travel at a top speed of , spin at a rate of 10 revolutions per minute, and tilt plus or minus 8deg. P&P; Projects' Philipp van Stratum compares the ride system to that of The Amazing Adventures of Spider-Man. At the time of the ride's installation in 1999, the cost of such a system would be prohibitive for most parks. He states, "the falling price of technology has made these kinds of attractions much more affordable and we can confirm that the budget for Tusenfryd is a fraction of what was paid for Spider-Man all those years ago; however we have still aim to put the bar very high." Ruud Koppens of ETF Ride Systems has echoed this sentiment. ==Reception== In 2013, Thor's Hammer was nominated for an IAAPA-presented European Star Award for best dark ride. The ride got second place after Etnaland's Haunted School won the category. ==See also== * 2013 in amusement parks ==References== ==External links== * * ETF Multi Mover with Motion Platform Category:Amusement rides introduced in 2013 Category:2013 3D films Category:Simulator rides Category:Norse mythology in popular culture 
