Thottopalayam thottimvirus, formerly Thottapalayam virus, (TMPV) is single- stranded, enveloped, negative-sense RNA virus species of the genus Thottimvirus in the Bunyavirales order. It is the first hantavirus to be isolated from a shrew. It was discovered in India in 1964.Carey DE, Reuben R, Panicker KN, Shope RE, Myers RM. Thottapalayam virus: a presumptive arbovirus isolated from a shrew in India. Indian J Med Res. 1971;59:1758-60.Serge Morand, Francois Beaudeau, Jacques Cabaret.New Frontiers of Molecular Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases. Springer, Sep 8, 2011. pp. 198-199. == Natural reservoir == TPMV was first isolated from an Asian house shrew (Suncus murinus) in India in 1964. It is part of a group of hantaviruses which are hosted by shrews instead of rodents. These shrew-borne thottimviruses are not known to cause any known disease in humans, unlike the similar and related orthohantaviruses including Andes and Hantaan viruses, which cause lethal hemorrhagic fevers. TPMV was first isolated in Asian house shrews in Wenzhou of Zhejiang province, China.Wen-Ping Guo, Xian-Dan Lin, Wen Wang, Xiao-He Zhang, Yi Chen, Jian-Hai Cao, Qing-Xiang Ni, Wang-Cang Li, Ming-Hui Li, Alexander Plyusnin, Yong-Zhen Zhang. A new subtype of Thottapalayam virus carried by the Asian house shrew (Suncus murinus) in China. Infection, genetics and evolution: journal of molecular epidemiology and evolutionary genetics in infectious diseases (Impact Factor: 3.22). 07/2011; 11(8):1862-7. == Virology == Phylogenetic analysis has shown that Thottapalayam virus, and its closely related strains, is unique and forms a distinct lineage, unrelated to other hantaviruses. The closest hantavirus to TMPV is Imjin virus which demonstrates corresponding nucleotide sequences to TPMV as does Tanganya virus.Wen-Ping Guo, Xian-Dan Lin, Wen Wang, Xiao-He Zhang, Yi Chen, Jian-Hai Cao, Qing-Xiang Ni, Wang-Cang Li, Ming-Hui Li, Alexander Plyusnin, Yong-Zhen Zhang. A new subtype of Thottapalayam virus carried by the Asian house shrew (Suncus murinus) in China. Infection, genetics and evolution: journal of molecular epidemiology and evolutionary genetics in infectious diseases (Impact Factor: 3.22). 07/2011; 11(8):1862-7. == See also == *RNA virus *Puumala virus == References == == External links == * CDC's Hantavirus Technical Information Index page * Virus Pathogen Database and Analysis Resource (ViPR): Bunyaviridae Category:Viral diseases Category:Hantaviridae Category:Hemorrhagic fevers Category:Rodent-carried diseases 
