Titus Sextius Lateranus was a Roman senator active in the second century AD. He was ordinary consul in the year 154 as the colleague of Lucius Verus.Werner Eck, "Die Fasti consulares der Regungszeit des Antoninus Pius, eine Bestandsaufnahme seit Geza Alfoldys Konsulat und Senatorenstand" in Studia epigraphica in memoriam Geza Alfoldy, hg. W. Eck, B. Feher, and P. Kovacs (Bonn, 2013), p. 74 Lateranus is also known by a more full name, which has been restored in two different ways: Titus Sextius Lateranus M. Vibius Ovel[lius?...] Secundus L. Vol[usius Torquatus?] Vestinus,Mennen, Power and Status of the Roman Empire, AD 193-284, p. 200 or Titus Sextius... Marcus Vibius Qui[etus(?)] Secundus Lucius Vol[usius Torquatus (?)] Vestinus.Biographischer Index der Antike, p. 864 Lateranus was a member of the Roman Republican gens Sextia. He was the son of Titus Sextius Cornelius Africanus, consul in 112,Bennett, Trajan: Optimus Princeps: a Life and Times, p. 183 by his wife, a noblewoman from the gens Vibia. The cursus honorum for Lateranus can be reconstructed from an inscription from Rome. That this inscription attests he was a member of the tresviri monetalis, the most prestigious of the four boards that comprised the vigintiviri, and performed his duties as a quaestor for the Emperor indicates he was a member of the patrician order. His status also explains the absence of any office between quaestor and his consulate except for praetor. At an unknown date he was a member of the sodales Hadrianales, a priesthood dedicated to performing rituals honoring the deified emperor Hadrian. He served as a Proconsul of the Province of Africa in 168/169, considered the apex of a successful senatorial career.Mennen, Power and Status, pp. 204-5 Lateranus was the father of Titus Sextius Magius Lateranus, ordinary consul in 197.Mennen, Power and Status ==References== ==Sources== * * J. Bennett, Trajan: Optimus Princeps: a Life and Times, Routledge, 1997 * Biographischer Index der Antike (Google eBook), Walter de Gruyter, 2001 * I. Mennen, Power and Status of the Roman Empire, AD 193-284, BRILL, 2011 Category:2nd-century Romans Category:Imperial Roman consuls Category:Roman governors of Africa Lateranus (consul 154) Category:Vibii 
