Tomislav Mrcela (; born 1 October 1990) is an Australian footballer of Croatian descent who lasted plays as a centre back for Australian A-League club Perth Glory. ==Club career== Mrcela left Australia at a young age and joined the youth academy of Dalmatian side RNK Split. He left Split in 2009 to join Jadran Kastel, a third division side at the time, and later signed for NK Primorac 1929 in 2010. In mid 2011, Tomislav joined NK Imotski. Despite being just 20 years of age, Mrcela was immediately a starter. Missing just one game all season, Mrcela made 29 appearances and scored a further three goals. Mrcela continued his good form into the next season and missed just one further game by January 2013. His good form led to a move to fellow second division side NK Mosor where he played out the remainder of the 2012-13 season. After good performances at Mosor, he moved to top division side NK Hrvatski Dragovoljac. Initially Mrcela struggled, making just four appearances in the first twelve rounds but then became a mainstay in the starting XI. Unfortunately his side were relegated by the end of the season but Mrcela did enough to convince ambitious Zagreb side NK Lokomotiva to keep him in the first division by signing him on a four-year dealSoccerway ProfileNK Lokomotiva: Tomislav Mrcela novi je igrac Lokomotive! Mrcela scored his first goal for Lokomotiva on debut in a 5-2 loss against HNK Hajduk Split. On 28 June 2016, Mrcela transferred to South Korean club Jeonnam Dragons. On 14 June 2018, Mrcela left Jeonnam Dragons to join Australian A-League club Perth Glory on a two-year deal. ==International career== Mrcela is eligible to play for either Croatia or Australia due to holding dual citizenship. On 10 June 2015, Mrcela was named in a 23-man squad for Australia ahead of two 2018 FIFA World Cup qualifying matches against Kyrgyzstan. ==Honours== Perth Glory * A-League: Premiers 2018-19 ==References== ==External links== * * Category:1990 births Category:Living people Category:Australian soccer players Category:Croatian footballers Category:Association football defenders Category:NK Primorac 1929 players Category:NK Imotski players Category:RNK Split players Category:NK Mosor players Category:NK Hrvatski Dragovoljac players Category:NK Lokomotiva players Category:Jeonnam Dragons players Category:Perth Glory FC players Category:Croatian First Football League players Category:Australian people of Croatian descent 
