Triantafyllos Macheridis (; born 10 November 1973), is a former Greek professional footballer who played as a defensive midfielder. ==Club career== Machairidis began his professional career in 1990 with boyhood club Pandramaikos. After two spells with Pandramaikos and Skoda Xanthi, Triantafyllos would sign for Greek football giants AEK Athens in 1996. His stay with the Athens side would prove to be successful, as on his first appearance his side won the Greek Super Cup defeating Panathinaikos on penalties. He was also an integral part of the AEK side who won the 1996-97 Greek Cup. After two successful seasons with AEK, Machairidis moved to Thessaloniki, to play for P.A.O.K. F.C.. On 30 December 1999 at the age of 26, Machairidis was signed by Benfica of Portugal who was at the time led by German coach Jupp Heynckes. Machairidis debuted for the Encarnados on 9 January 2000 in the Derby de Lisboa match against Sporting CP. Despite his stay with Benfica being short, Machairidis would feature regularly in a side who finished third in the domestic league campaign behind Porto and Sporting CP. He would finish the 1999-2000 season with sixteen appearances to his name. In the transfer season of 2000, Machairidis failed to report to the preseason, with threats of having to compensate Benfica for unilaterally terminating his contract. After negotiations, he joined Kalamata on loan for the remainder of the season, leaving permanently in June 2001. Following Benfica, Triantafyllos would sign for Alki Larnaca of Cyprus where he would remain their for two seasons before finishing his career with boyhood club Doxa Drama in 2004. ==Honours== ;AEK Athens * Greek Super Cup: 1996 * Greek Football Cup: 1996-97 ;Alki Larnaca * Cypriot Second Division: 2000-01 ==References== ==External links== * Category:1973 births Category:Living people Category:People from Drama, Greece Category:Greek footballers Category:Pandramaikos F.C. players Category:Xanthi F.C. players Category:AEK Athens F.C. players Category:PAOK FC players Category:S.L. Benfica footballers Category:Kalamata F.C. players Category:Alki Larnaca FC players Category:Doxa Drama F.C. players Category:AO Chania F.C. players Category:Super League Greece players Category:Cypriot First Division players Category:Cypriot Second Division players Category:Primeira Liga players Category:Association football midfielders Category:Greek expatriate footballers Category:Expatriate footballers in Portugal Category:Greek expatriate sportspeople in Portugal Category:Expatriate footballers in Cyprus Category:Greek expatriate sportspeople in Cyprus 
