The Turkmenbashi International Seaport () is the main passenger harbour and cargo port in Turkmenbashi, Turkmenistan. It is located in the eastern part of the Caspian Sea. Regular lines serve routes to Baku (Azerbaijan),The Turkmenbashi International seaport offers cargo and passenger transportation services Aktau (Kazakhstan) and Astrakhan (Russia). It is the largest seaport in Turkmenistan. == History == Alcyone in 1998, Port of Turkmenbashy city Caspian Sea at the Port of Turkmenbasy The port was founded in October 1896 on the eastern coast of the Caspian Sea. On January 1, 1903, the Merchant marine port Authority was established. Cargo traffic increased over the years, therefore, there an idea occurred to build a ferry terminal. Since 1959, the port began a construction of a ferry. Regular voyages on ferryline Baku- Krasnovodsk started taking in 1962. The ferry terminal transportation has allowed to significantly accelerate cargo delivery. In 2000-2003, a massive reconstruction project began. The old port was reconstructed along with construction of new berths for ships and warehouses and other facilities with modern equipment. This made it possible to provide port services at the highest level. In 2013, the port built passenger catamaran "Charlak". It was the first shipbuilding project of this level in the history of the port. August 15, 2013 began the construction of a new port, worth $2 billion, to erect a Turkish company GAP Insaat. At the groundbreaking ceremony was attended by President of Turkmenistan Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedov and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Erdogan. Construction was completed in 2018. The project involves the construction of the ferry, passenger and cargo terminals in 1 mln 200 thousand square meters. It is also planned to build a shipyard. ==Importance== Turkmenbashi port have great geopolitical importance in Eurasia. Being on the trade route Europe-Caucasus-Asia (TRACECA), it is able to accommodate vessels throughout the year, around the clock to carry out loading and unloading operations. The port is a "sea gate", linking Central Asia to Europe by sea, road and rail routes and serves as a major transit hub in the region. ==References== ==External links== * Official web-site * Information Category:Transport in Turkmenistan Category:Ports and harbours of Turkmenistan 
