Ugljesa Vlatkovic (Serbian Cyrillic: Ugljesha Vlatkovitsh) (c. 1359 - after 1427) was a Serbian nobleman from the late 14th and early 15th centuries. He had the title of kesar (caesar) and ruled over the area of Inogost (today Surdulica), Presevo and Vranje. His grandfather Knez Paskac and his father Sevastokrator Vlatko Paskacic (House of Paskacic), were both nobles of Emperor Dusan the Mighty and ruled over the border areas between Republic of Serbia and North Macedonia, including Slaviste zupa. His family built Psaca monastery with the church of Saint Nicholas, around 1354. His biography was written at the end of the 1360s, and one of the boys portrayed on the fresco could be Ugljesa. Ugljesa received the title of caesar when he was a boy from the Emperor Uros the Weak, and after his father's death most of his lands were usurped by the Dejanovic brothers. After the Battle of Rovine in 1395, he probably managed to retake his father's land and became a vassal of the Ottoman Sultan. It is mentioned that at the beginning of the 15th century he gave one church to the Hilandar monastery. It isn't known if he participated in the Battle of Ankara, but he joined Ottoman forces sent by Suleyman Celebi. Their goal was to merge with forces of Brankovic and prevent the return of Stefan Lazarevic in Serbia. On 21 November 1402, the Battle of Gracanica happened. Caesar Ugljesa, who was the vassal of Ottomans, knew about their battle plans and informed Stefan Lazarevic. At the very beginning of the battle, he defected to the Lazarevic's side and considerably contributed to his victory. As a reward for his conduct, Despot Stefan confirmed his authority over his father's lands and became Stefan's vassal. Over the years, Ugljesa was a faithful vassal of Stefan Lazarevic and with his forces participated in the Battle of Kosmidion on 15 June 1410. Byzantine sources mentioned him as part of Stefan Lazarevic's delegation, who went to Constantinople on the Emperor Manuel II's invitation. In the 1412, his lands were attacked by the forces of Musa Celebi. Celebi's forces marched across the Cemernik, sacked Vranje and attacked Novo Brdo, and Ugljesa itself barely managed to retreat alive. After Stefan's death, Constantine of Kostenets moved to the court of Ugljesa Vlatkovic and lived there for some time. He had son Stefan, who died c. 1400 and was buried in Ljubostinja monastery. == References == Category:14th-century Serbian nobility Category:Medieval Macedonia Category:People of the Serbian Empire Category:People of the Serbian Despotate 
