Venus Nicolino, known on television as Dr. V', is an American media personality, author and doctor of clinical psychology. Her first book, Bad Advice: How to Survive and Thrive in an Age of Bullshit appeared on USA Todays National Bestseller ListUSA TODAY'S National Bestseller List and debuted at number one on the LA Times Bestseller List for Hardcover Nonfiction. It was also recommended in a New York Post article as one of the "five books that will change your life". Dr. V is the host of Marriage Boot Camp: Reality Stars on We TV. She began hosting the show in its sixth season and has also appeared in a reality television series on Bravo, L.A. Shrinks. ==TV career== Dr. V began hosting Marriage Boot Camp: Reality Stars in its sixth season. She is also the host of the spin-off Marriage Boot Camp: Family Edition. The thirteenth season of the show will air on August 9, 2019. Beginning with L.A. Shrinks in 2013, Dr. V appeared on other television shows, including Real Housewives of New Jersey, Millionaire Matchmaker and Marriage Boot Camp: Reality Stars and as a recurring guest on Watch What Happens Live, The Dr. Oz Show, The Doctors, MeTime with Frangela, Access Live,and Rachael Ray. She is also a revolving panelist on Steve. Dr. V is a proponent of balanced diets, exercise, and healthy eating. She believes 20% of children in America are mis- diagnosed as having mental illness. Nicolino is an outspoken critic of the over-prescription of drugs, especially to children. L.A. Shrinks producers described her as "sharp tongued with a mind to match", and said that she "serves up the sass" while being empathic with her clients. Critic Robert Lloyd in the Los Angeles Times wrote that the show felt "uncomfortably contrived", and that Nicolino appeared to be "auditioning here for a show of her own"; Lloyd criticized the show for over-emphasizing pop-culture topics such as sex. However, A Bella LA interview observed that "Dr. V's edgy and humorous yet philosophical take on "How to Human" has made her an audience favorite." ==References== Category:Living people Category:Participants in American reality television series Category:People from Delaware County, Pennsylvania Category:Clinical psychologists Category:CNN people Category:1972 births Category:21st-century American physicians Category:21st-century American women physicians 
