Vermont Creamery is a creamery and artisanal cheese and butter-maker in Websterville, Vermont, USA.Kay Rentschler, "A Sweet Dream for Sweet Cream: Butter Puts On a French Accent", New York Times, December 24, 2003. It was founded in 1984 by business partners Allison Hooper and Bob Reese."Great US Creameries", ABC News Previously known as the Vermont Butter and Cheese Company, the company adopted its current name in 2013. ==History and products== The creamery produces a variety of fresh and aged dairy products from cows' and goats' milk. Cow cream and butter products sold by the company are creme fraiche, creme fraiche-vanilla and cultured butter. Cows' fresh cheese products sold by the company are fromage blanc, mascarpone and quark. Goats' aged cheese products sold by the company are bijou, Bonne Bouche, Coupole and Cremont. Goats' fresh cheese products sold by the company are creamy goat cheese, feta, fresh crottin, fresh goat cheese and fresh goat cheese-crumbled.Our Products, Vermont Creamery. Cows' milk is sourced from the St. Albans Cooperative Creamery in St. Albans, Vermont, while goats' milk is sourced from approximately 20 Vermont farms and Hewitt's Dairy in Hagersville, Ontario, Canada. In 2012, Vermont Creamery launched the Ayers Brook Goat Dairy initiative, with the goal of becoming the first goat dairy demonstration farm in the United States.Ayers Brook Goat Dairy Initiative, Vermont Creamery. The company was initially based in Brookfield, Vermont, where it began in a small barn by Hooper's house, before moving to larger premises in Websterville in 1989.The Creamery, Vermont Creamery. In 2014, the Creamery employed approximately 45 individuals. The company introduced the French fromage blanc to the United States and is well known for this cheese.Marian Burros, "The French Idea of Diet Food", New York Times, November 8, 2000. \- "A French Staple That's Made in America", New York Times, January 20, 1988. \- Florence Fabricant, "French-Style Fresh Cheese From Vermont", New York Times, April 27, 2010. The Bonne Bouche, another signature product, is an "ash-dusted" goats' cheese.Florence Fabricant, "For the Good Stocking", New York Times, December 20, 2006. On March 29, 2017, Hooper announced they were selling Vermont Creamery to Land O'Lakes. ==See also== * List of cheesemakers ==References== ==External links== *Official website *Profile from the Vermont Cheese Council Category:Food and drink companies based in Vermont Category:Buildings and structures in Barre (town), Vermont Category:Agriculture in Vermont Category:Cheesemakers Category:Dairy products companies of the United States Category:B Lab-certified corporations Category:American companies established in 1987 Category:Food and drink companies established in 1987 
