Vladimir Karamazov (born 1979) is a Bulgarian actor, producer and photographer. In 2013 he was awarded the "Golden Century" diploma for contribution to culture. The award is given by the Ministry of Culture of Republic of Bulgaria. == Biography == Vladimir Karamazov () was born April 27, 1979 in Sofia, Bulgaria. He received classical drama theater training at the National Academy for Theatre and Film Arts in Sofia. In 2002 he joined the National Theater "Ivan Vazov". Since 2014 Vladimir Karamazov is a regular ambassador of the "Theatre's Night", part of the "European Theatre Night" initiative. In 2017 Vladimir Karamazov lectures in "Ideas Rearranged - StartUP Conference 2017", presenting the communication strategy of "Three Bears Entertainment" and some of the most successful and effective advertising campaigns and projects of their production company. Since the first edition in 2013 every year Vladimir Karamazov is nominated for "Bachelor of the Year" - section "Show Business". In 2019 Vladimir Karamazov takes the path of a photographer. His photographs are featured on prestigious photography platforms and win awards. Karamazov speaks English and Russian. His real name is Vladimir Aleksandrov. The artistic name Karamazov was assigned by the director Lilia Abadjieva for his part as Romeo. His hobbies and passions are traveling around the world, scuba diving and track motorcycles. == Theater == Karamazov started his career as an actor in 2000 in the National Theater "Ivan Vazov" as Romeo in the play "Romeo and Juliet" by William Shakespeare, directed by Lilia Abadjieva. In 2006 "Romeo and Juliet" with Karamazov as Romeo is presented at Lit Moon Theatre in Santa Barbara, USA. Karamazov continued his theater presence in the National Theater "Ivan Vazov" with performances in ,,The King Stag" by Carlo Gozzi and directed by Marius Kurkinski (2001), as Valentino in "Twelfth Night" by Shakespeare and directed by Robert Sturua (2001), as Ivan Senebirski in "Albena" by Yordan Yovkov and directed by Ivan Dobchev (2002), as Florizel in "The Winter's Tale" by Shakespeare and directed by Marius Kurkinski (2002), as Ferdinand in "The Tempest" by Shakespeare and directed by Alexander Morfov (2003), as Ross in "Macbeth" by Shakespeare and directed by Plamen Markov (2003), as Jeko Horov in "Careerists" by Ivan Vazov and directed by Ivan Dobchev (2004), in "The Outcasts" by Ivan Vazov and directed by Alexander Morfov (2004), as Desdemona in "Othello" by Shakespeare and directed by Lilia Abadjieva (2005), as Edmund in "King Lear" by Shakespeare and directed by Javor Gardev (2006), as Lord Goring in "An Ideal Husband" by Oscar Wilde and directed by Thierry Harcourt (2007), as Guido Wernig in "Bacchanalia" by Arthur Schnitzler and directed by Anton Ugrinov (2007), as Perdican in "No Trifling with Love" by Alfred de Musset and directed by Marius Kurkinski (2007), as Gustave in "Carnival of Thieves" by Jean Anouilh and directed by Thierry Harcourt (2008), as Florindo Aretusi in "Servant of Two Masters" by Carlo Goldoni and directed by Mitko Bozakov (2009), as Yasha in "The Cherry Orchard" by Anton Chekhov and directed by Krikor Azarian (2009). His performances in other theaters include also the role of Michal in "Vernissage" by Vaclav Havel and directed by Anton Ugrinov, Satirical Theater "Aleko Konstantinov", and the role of The Fisherman in "The Fisherman and His Soul" by Oscar Wilde and directed by Marius Kurkinski, Theater 199, the role of Casanova in "Casanova - Requiem for Love" written and directed by Diana Dobreva, DT "Salza i smiah" (2009). In 2010 and 2013 the play "Casanova - Requiem for Love" with Vladimir Karamazov as Giacomo Casanova gathers ovations in France - at the Avignon Theater Festival, France and in theaters in Paris. Karamazov's acting talent is recognized there. In March and April 2013 "Casanova" guest-performs in Theatre de l'Epee de Bois in Paris, France. In the National Theater "Ivan Vazov" Vladimir Karamazov performs also as Christian in "Cyrano de Bergerac" by Edmond Rostand and directed by Tedi Moskov (2010), as Joseph Pitt in "Angels in America" by Tony Kushner and directed by Desislava Shpatova (2010), as Khlestakov in "The Government Inspector" by Nikolai Gogol and directed by Marius Kurkinski (2011). Karamazov returns to Satirical Theater "Aleko Konstantinov" in 2012 in the role of Soap in "Spinach and Chips" by Zoltan Egressy and directed by Bogdan Petkanin. After more than 10 years on stage playing in more than 25 theater plays and participations in television shows, films and TV series, in 2013 Karamazov together with his colleagues and best friends Zachary Baharov and Julian Vergov created the "Three Bears Entertainment" production company, which first project is the play "Art" by Yasmina Reza, co-production with the Satirical Theater "Aleko Konstantinov". Since its premiere in April 2013 the play tours all over the country. In 2014 and 2016 Vladimir Karamazov played The Scoundrel (Flynn) in "Tales for Symphonic Orchestra" by Fortissimo Familia in "Bulgaria" Hall, conductor Maxim Eshkenazy. In 2015 Karamazov participates in "Portrait of Tchaikovsky - Child of Glass" (as Tchaikovsky). In 2017 he participates in "The Carnival of the Animals" (as The African King) from the Fortissimo Familia program. In 2014 you can see Vladimir Karamazov in the National Theater "Ivan Vazov" as the teacher Ivan Garvanov in the play "The Conspirators from Solun", written by Georgi Danailov and directed by Stoyan Radev. In 2015 Vladimir Karamazov returns to Satirical Theater "Aleko Konstantinov" with a production of his company Three Bears Entertainment of the play "Dakota", written by Jordi Galceran and directed by Vladimir Penev. He is the Hospital Attendant, the Policeman, the Crippled Soldier. In 2016 Karamazov plays the character of Alain Reille in "God of Carnage", written by Yasmina Reza and directed by Anton Ugrinov in the National Theater "Ivan Vazov". In 2017 Vladimir Karamazov plays the character of Andrei in "Delhi Dance", written by Ivan Vyrypaev and directed by Galin Stoev in the National Theater "Ivan Vazov". In 2018 Vladimir Karamazov plays the character of Shalimov in "Neo-Summerfolk", written by Maxim Gorky and directed by Ivan Panteleev in the National Theater "Ivan Vazov". == Television == Vladimir Karamazov appears for a first time in a TV series in 2002 in the Bulgarian adaptation of Un gars, une fille (She and He) (Season 1 - 4) on bTV (as Dany). In 2006 he is the host of a tourist TV show "Without Luggage" on TV7. In 2007-2014 Karamazov is the host of four seasons of the Bulgarian edition of Survivor BG on bTV - Survivor BG: Expedition Robinson, Survivor BG: Pearl Islands, Survivor Bulgaria 4 and Survivor 5 - Cambodia. In 2013 he plays Panto Valchev in the TV series "The Tree of Life" (Season 1 - 2) on TV7. He also plays Stanimir Kisiov in the TV series "Fourth Power" (Season 1) on BNT 1. In 2015 Vladimir Karamazov is the host of the television game "Bingo Millions"/"Lottery Bulgaria" on bTV. In 2019 Vladimir Karamazov plays the lead character Philip Chanov in the TV series "Devil's Throat" (Season 1) on NOVA TV. In 2018-2020 Karamazov plays Hristo Karagyozov in the TV series "Stolen Life" (Season 6 - 9) on NOVA TV. == Films == In 2009 Vladimir Karamazov gives his voice to Prince Naveen in the Bulgarian release of the animated movie "The Princess and The Frog". In 2011 he was the voice to the Narrator in the Bulgarian release of the documentary movie "Hubble 3D". In 2008 Karamazov was Vladimir in the movie "Naive", and in 2012 he was Germain in "I Am You". In 2016 Vladimir Karamazov gives his voice to Beetle in the Bulgarian release of the animated movie "Kubo and the Two Strings". Vladimir Karamazov plays in the short films "You Are It" (2007) and "Meat" (2010). == Commercials == Vladimir Karamazov appears in commercials of Nivea, Andrews Fashion, MTel, Nissan,Vicks, Gillette, Vodka Flirt, Coca Cola Light EGG. == Initiatives and Charity Campaigns == Over the years Vladimir Karamazov is involved in many initiatives and charity campaigns - Bulgarian Christmas (of the President of Republic of Bulgaria), UNICEF ("Violence-Free Future for Every Child", "Together since Kindergarten", and others), Openly for Diabetis, Theaters Night, Fortissimo Family, Recreate Classics, The Poets (of Interview.to), Mission Maverick, Great Together, Wings for Life World Run, Better with Pets, Praktika. ==Awards and Nominations== In 2003 Vladimir Karamazov is nominated for "ASKEER" award - Rising Star for his role as Ivan Senebirski in "Albena" (National Theater "Ivan Vazov"). In 2011 he is nominated for "ASKEER" award - Best Supporting Actor and for "IKAR" award for his role as Christian in "Cyrano de Bergerac" (National Theater "Ivan Vazov"). In 2011 Vladimir Karamazov receives award "Ivan Dimov" for high achievements in the arts, given by the Fund for Talented Young Actors at "Young Bulgarian Talents" Foundation. In 2013 he receives diploma "Golden Century" for contribution to culture, awarded by the Ministry of Culture of Republic of Bulgaria. In 2015 and 2016 Vladimir Karamazov is in "Forbes Top 70 Bulgarian Celebrities" and in "TOP 50 Most Influential Bulgarians in Facebook" In 2017 Vladimir Karamazov is nominated for "ASKEER" award - Best Leading Actor for his role as Alain Reille in "God of Carnage" by Yasmina Reza (National Theater "Ivan Vazov"). == References == == External links == * Vladimir Karamazov (personal site) * Vladimir Karamazov Photography * Category:1979 births Category:Living people Category:Bulgarian male film actors Category:Bulgarian male stage actors Category:Male actors from Sofia Category:20th-century Bulgarian male actors Category:21st-century Bulgarian male actors 
