VOC BioTreat(tm) is a U.S. patent pending technology from Ramboll Environ that destroys volatile organic compounds (VOCs) by piping them into a deep-tank aerated activated sludge wastewater treatment plant."VOC BIOTREAT: A cost- effective solution for the biodestruction of volatile organic compound emissions" ENVIRON. Retrieved 2013-08-29. The technology meets U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) standards for VOC and Hazardous Air Pollutant removal and can be used with existing pollution remediation infrastructure at refineries, chemical companies, pharmaceutical manufactures and others. == Health hazards of VOCs == Emissions of volatile organic compounds such as benzene from oil refineries and chemical plants pose a long- term health risk to workers and local communities."Fugitive Emissions," Wikipedia. Retrieved 2013-08-28. The EPA regulates VOCs mainly because of their ability to create photochemical smog and regards reducing the concentration of VOCs as an important health and environmental goal."Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) Technical Overview" U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Indoor Air. Retrieved 2013-08-28. == Technological approach == VOC BioTreat expands upon existing pollution remediation infrastructure at industrial companies. It pipes biodegradable airborne VOCs into the biotreatment plant treating waterborne VOCs. This eliminates the need for a separate approach to addressing airborne emissions by using activated carbon filters and burning the residue."Environ's VOC BioTreat" Engineering News- Record. 20 April 2011. Retrieved 2013-08-28. The work in developing the protocols and resulting solutions on VOC BioTreat was led by Dr. Carl Adams, Ramboll Environ's Global Practice Leader for Industrial Waste Management."Alumnus Carl Adams Awarded E3 Grand Prize in Research for 2011" The University of Texas at Austin, Cockrell School of Engineering. Retrieved 2013-08-27. Dr. Adams holds three patents involving advanced industrial wastewater treatment technology. He has worked with over 90 refineries in North America and around the world. He is recognized by the EPA as an expert in the development of cost-effective volatile organic compounds (VOC) control technologies, especially for refineries and petrochemical plants."Wastewater Treatment and Related Modeling Workshop Participants" U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Participant Bios, April 18, 2013 meeting in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. Retrieved 2013-08-28. == Awards and honors == Following the use of VOC BioTreat at the Marathon Petroleum Company's refinery in Garyville, Louisiana, ENVIRON, whose operations preceded Ramboll Environ, received the 2011 Grand Prize in Research from the American Academy of Environmental Engineers and Scientists."Grand Prize - Research, Patented & Innovative Cost-Saving Control Device for Facility-Generated Volatile organic Compound (VOC) Emissions, Marathon Refinery, Garyville, Louisiana" Environmental Engineer, publication of the American Academy of Environmental Engineers, Spring 2011, p. 38. Retrieved 2013-08-29. The Academy said, "Refineries and chemical industries with a current activated sludge system that meet certain criteria would be strong candidates for ENVIRON's new VOC BioTreat(tm) approach," while also noting that the technology "greatly reduces capital investment" and "long-term operational costs." In September 2011, VOC BioTreat was a semi-finalist for the Kirkpatrick Chemical Engineering Achievement Award. Chemical Engineering Magazine has awarded this biennial prize continuously since 1933."ENVIRON's VOC BioTreat(tm) named semi-finalist for Kirkpatrick Award" ENVIRON news release, 28 September 2011. Retrieved 2013-08-28. "Biodegradation system for VOCs poised for expansion" Chemical Engineering Magazine, June 2011. Retrieved 2013-10-04. == References == == External links == * American Academy of Environmental Engineers & Scientists * U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants Compliance Monitoring * ENVIRON Corporation Category:Waste treatment technology 
