Vu Hong Khanh (1898 - 14 November 1993) born Vu Van GiangVu Hong Khanh's history of the Vietnam Nationalist Party (Viet Nam Quoc dan Dang) - Brett Reilly, was a Vietnamese revolutionary of the Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang faction.Van Dao Hoang Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang: A Contemporary History of a National 2008 "Vu Hong Khanh was elected its secretary general, putting him in opposition to the Ngo Thuc Dich central committee. Each party organization tried to recruit more Party members and cultivate better activities and achievements than the other." Vu Hong Khanh left Vietnam for Yunnan during the French colonial crackdown of 1930 and enrolled in a Kuomintang military school in Kunming. He graduated and was granted a commission in the Nationalist Chinese Twentieth Army Corps, where he rose quickly to the rank of brigadier general. In 1941 he took on the role of head of a school training Vietnamese, Burmese and Thai recruits. He became the vice-president of the "Government of National Unity," March to October 1946.Nguyen Cong Luan Nationalist in the Viet Nam Wars: Memoirs of a Victim Turned 2012 - "Other nationalist leaders were appointed ministers, such as the famous writer Nguyen T?ong Tam, pen name Nhat Linh, of the Viet Quoc, as minister of foreign affairs, and Vu Hong Khanh of the Viet Quoc, vice chairman of the Resistance ..."Robert Trando Letters of a Vietnamese Emigre 2010 Page 47 "The opposition party arrived, especially Nguyen Hai Than and Vu Hong Khanh, in starched blue denim, high-collared, Chinese-style outfits. Ho went out to meet them, arms wide open in a bear hug, tears circling his eyes." After Mao declared a communist state in Beijing in 1949 the exiled Vietnamese nationalists in China formed the Lien Minh, supporting Cuong De and opposing both the French and the communists. Following the fall of Guangzhou to the communists the headquarters of the exiles moved to Hainan island, and Vu Hong Khanh became the leader of the part of the organisation which was to operate within Vietnam.Vietnamese Royal Exile in Japan - Page 203 "This organisation's central committee already consisted of active nationalists, including men of calibre like Nguyen Hai Than, Vu Hong Khanh and Luu Duc Trung himself. The Lien Minh, as it was known, attracted about 210 members, most of whom were Chinese and Vietnamese emigres. ... Thus Vu Hong Khanh became the leader of this organisation which was to operate within Vietnam as well. As far as . Khanh retired to his home village of lang Tho Tang, modern Vinh Tuong District, where he died at the age of 95. ==References== Category:1898 births Category:1993 deaths Category:Vietnamese nationalists Category:Vietnamese revolutionaries Category:People from Vinh Phuc Province Category:Vietnamese expatriates in China 
