== Biography == Wally Hunter is the current Managing Director of EnerTech Capital. Prior to EnerTech, Wally worked for the Royal Bank of Canada where he managed the bank's private equities for energy and advanced technologies. Wally has been investing in energy and clean energy companies and projects for 15 years. Wally runs EnerTech's Canadian operations from Toronto. His specific areas of interest and responsibility include opportunities in alternative fuels and storage, power quality and conversion, water re-use in energy, Wind turbine technologies, power electronics, advanced materials, motor controls, automation and sensors. Wally has an extensive background in the venture capital business which includes a series of successful IPO's, M&A; and turnaround transactions throughout his 20-year career in the finance business. In addition, Wally previously produced and hosted the weekly financial television show "Money Week" which featured over 200 guest interviews from Canadian and U.S. money managers over a 14-year period. Wally was also previously involved in politics and sat as a local Councilor in the town of Milton, Ontario (3 terms) and on the board of the Ontario College of Pharmacists (Chair of finance). == Recent Achievements == As for recent achievements Wally was past Chairman of the Banff, Alberta Venture Forum Cleantec Stream and Chairman of the 2014 Canadian Venture Capital Association conference in Ottawa in May, 2014. He sits on the boards of both the CVCA and the Venture Capital Association of Alberta (VCAA) as well as EnerTech's portfolio companies Enbala Power Networks, FilterBoxx and n-Dimension Solutions. Wally is an observer on the boards of HPC Energy and Distech Controls. == Education == Wally received a BA from the University of Western Ontario and has completed a number of securities-related courses and programs including the Canadian Securities Institute (CSC program) and Canadian Investment Finance (CIF I, II &III;). "EnerTech Capital, Investors, Return on Investment." EnerTech Capital, Investors, Return on Investment. N.p., n.d. Web. 01 Oct. 2013."List of Private Companies Worldwide, Letter - Businessweek." Businessweek.com. N.p., n.d. Web. 01 Oct. 2013. ==References== Category:Canadian business executives Category:Living people Category:Canadian television producers Category:Year of birth missing (living people) 
