The Wetzikon-Meilen tramway (, WMB) was a metre gauge rural electric tramway in the Swiss canton of Zurich. It linked the town of Meilen, on the shore of Lake Zurich, with Wetzikon and Kempten in the Zurcher Oberland. The WMB had interchanges with the main line at Meilen station, on the Lake Zurich right bank line, at Wetzikon station, on the Wallisellen to Rapperswil line, and at Kempten station, on the Effretikon to Hinwil line. It also had a track connection with another metre gauge rural tramway, the Uster-Oetwil-Bahn (UOeB), at . Through the UOeB, the WMB had indirect metre gauge connections to the Forchbahn and the Zurich city tram network. The tramway was opened on 3 January 1903, with termini on the lakeside in Meilen and at Kempten. The section between Meilen lakeside and Meilen station closed on 3 October 1931, followed on 14 May 1939 by the section between Wetzikon and Kempten. The rump of the line survived until 13 May 1950, when it was replaced by a bus service operated by the Verkehrsbetriebe Zurichsee und Oberland (VZO). The line was electrified at 750 V DC. It had a length of , with 24 stops, a maximum gradient of 6.5% and a minimum radius of . Of the lines total length, ran in the street, with the remainder on its own dedicated right of way. Apart from one small concrete bridge, there were no significant engineering structures. The line's headquarters and workshops were located at Gruningen, with additional depots at Wetzikon and Meilen. The Gruningen site still exists and, with significant rebuilding, is now the headquarters of the VZO. Station buildings also exist at Uetikon, Mannedorf, Oetwil am See, Ottikon and Gossau, together with a goods shed at Grut. None of the WMB rolling stock has survived. A tram car is displayed at the VZO's Gruningen site, in the colour scheme of the WMB and carrying the markings of car CFe 4/4 2 of 1903. However this is in fact Trogenerbahn BDe 4/4 23, a largely identical car that never actually operated on the WMB. == Gallery == == References == == External links == * * The route in openstreetmap.org Category:Closed railway lines in Switzerland Category:Metre gauge railways in Switzerland Category:Tram transport in Switzerland Category:Transport in the canton of Zurich Category:Wetzikon 
