William H. Regnery II (born February 1941) is an American white nationalist political activist and donor, and an heir to a multi-million dollar fortune. He is the founder of the National Policy Institute, a white nationalist/supremacist think tank that has been credited with expanding the alt-right. ==Early life== William H. Regnery II was born in February 1941. His paternal grandfather, William H. Regnery, was a "textile magnate, banker, and philanthropist in Chicago." His uncle, Henry, in 1947 founded Regnery Publishing, which the Regnery family sold in 1993. Regnery enrolled at the University of Pennsylvania, where he studied Political Science; however, he dropped out before graduation. He was in charge of the family business "for only 15 months", but he was later sued by his family, who subsequently sold the business. ==Activism== While in college, Regnery was an active member of the Intercollegiate Studies Institute. He also worked on Barry Goldwater's 1964 presidential campaign. Regnery founded the Charles Martel Society, a non- profit organization based in Georgia, in 2001. The organization publishes a racist and anti-semitic journal, The Occidental Quarterly. According to the Associated Press, the society "raised $568,526 between 2007 and 2014" in tax deductible contributions. Regnery founded the National Policy Institute, an Identitarian think tank now based in Alexandria, Virginia, in 2005. In 2011, he hired Richard B. Spencer to run it. Regnery is described by the Southern Poverty Law Center as "a prime mover and shaker in white nationalism" and "famously reclusive"."All-White Dating Service Planned", Southern Poverty Law Center, Summer 2004 They add that he has worked to organize and fund a racist and anti-semitic network of publishers, websites and groups. ==Personal life== Regnery resides in Boca Grande, Florida. According to George Hawley, an assistant professor of Political Science at the University of Alabama, Regnery "seems to be the black sheep of the family, and he generally avoids the public spotlight." ==References== Category:Living people Category:People from Lee County, Florida Category:University of Pennsylvania alumni Category:American white nationalists Category:Regnery family Category:Alt-right Category:1941 births 
