Reconstructed stretch of causeway, with reproductions of cult figurines on either side Female (left) and male cult figurines The Wittemoor timber trackway is a log causeway or corduroy road across a bog at Neuenhuntdorf, part of the Berne in the district of Wesermarsch in Lower Saxony, Germany. Originating in the pre-Roman Iron Age, it is one of several such causeways which have been found in the North German Plain, particularly in the Weser-Ems region. It was excavated in 1965 and 1970 and prehistoric wooden cult figurines were discovered in association with it. It is trackway number XLII (IP). The trackway runs north-south and has been dated by dendrochronology to 135 BCE. It ran across the Wittemoor bog, connecting the more elevated geest at Hude with the River Hunte. An Iron Age settlement near a spring in the Lintel section of Hude was at the southern end. A section of the trackway has been reconstructed. Six abstract wooden figurines were found during excavation of the trackway. The first were faceless male and female stelae, among the few Iron Age carvings to be preserved. Carved in silhouette out of oak planks thick, they are highly stylised, the male about tall with a rectangular body, the female about tall with breasts or shoulders indicated by a slanted cut, broad hips and vulva. They stood on either side of the trackway at the point where it crosses a stream, the male figure slotted into a plank, the female on a small mound. Fire sites also on either side of the track, one at each end of the crossing, and stones and worked alder sticks around two simple cult poles immediately north of the female figure suggest that offerings were made there.Francesco Menotti, Wetland Archaeology and Beyond: Theory and Practice, Oxford: Oxford University, 2012, , p. 168."Trackways and Ritual Deposition", The Oxford Handbook of Wetland Archaeology, ed. Francesco Menotti and Aidan O'Sullivan, Oxford: Oxford University, 2013, , p. 369, Fig. 21.3, p. 370. The figurines had all been laid flat, which it has been suggested was to prevent desecration.Johannes Maringer, "Das Wasser in Kult und Glauben der vorgeschichtlichen Menschen", Anthropos 68.5/6 (1973) 705-76, p. 745 ; the suggestion was made by Hajo Hayen in the 1971 publication of the investigation. There was also a pole archway over the trackway between the two figures and the crossing.Gunter Behm-Blancke, "Materielle und geistige Kultur. Stammesgebiete im 1. und 2. Jahrhundert: Kult und Ideologie", in Bruno Kruger, et al., ed., Die Germanen: Geschichte und Kultur der germanischen Stamme in Mitteleuropa. Ein Handbuch in zwei Banden, Volume 1 Von den Anfangen bis zum 2. Jahrhundert unserer Zeitrechnung, Veroffentlichungen des Zentralinstituts fur Alte Geschichte und Archaologie der Akademie der Wissenschaften der DDR 4, Berlin: Akademie, 1976, OCLC 256529450, pp. 351-71, pp. 371, 373, Figs. 101, 102, p. 372 Menotti, p. 193. The figures are thought to have had an apotropaic (protective) function, although aesthetic decoration has also been suggested as an additional function.Heiko Steuer, "Uber anthropomorphe Moorpfahle der vorromischen Eisenzeit", in Studien zur Lebenswelt der Eisenzeit: Festschrift fur Rosemarie Muller, ed. Wolf-Rudiger Teegen, Rosemarie Muller, Rosemarie Cordie, Olaf Dorrer and Heiko Steuer, Reallexikon der Germanischen Altertumskunde, Erganzungsband 53, Berlin / New York: de Gruyter, 2006, The other four poles, one of which was hatchet-shaped, were at damaged locations in the causeway, and may have been either warning markers or cult objects. ==References== ==Further reading== * Hajo Hayen. "Holzerne Kultfiguren am Bohlenweg XLII (IP) im Wittemoor (Gemeinde Berne, Landkreis Wesermarsch)". Die Kunde NF 22 (1971), , 88-123. * Torsten Capelle and Bernhard Maier, "Idole, Idolatrie", in Reallexikon der Germanischen Altertumskunde, 2nd ed., Volume 15, Berlin / New York: de Gruyter, 2000, , pp. 325-30. ==External links== * Photograph and map at Panoramio * Martin L. Wittemoor Bohlenweg XLII (Ip) at The Megalithic Portal * Photographs at The Megalithic Portal Category:Ancient roads and tracks Category:Archaeological discoveries in Germany Category:Prehistoric sculpture Category:Germanic anthropomorphic cult images Category:Historic trails and roads in Germany Category:Prehistoric wooden trackways in Europe 
