Yadavally (also spelled Madha yadavally, M Yadavally, Yadavally or Yadavalli) is a village located in the Nalgonda district of Telangana, India. It is connected to Hyderabad by National Highway 9 and to Nalgonda by the SH 2 State Highway. It is the fastest growing village in the Nalgonda district. The village is currently receiving a lot of attention due to the economic development that has taken place over the past few years. This growth has largely been due to the village's strategic location and rapid industrialization. It lies between the two biggest cities of the state, Hyderabad and Vijayawada. Yadavally has a solar power project and one of the best private medical colleges in A.P. (Kamineni Institute of Medical Sciences which offers courses including MBBS, Dental, Nursing and PG). The KIMS Hospital attached to the medical colleges, serves the people of Narketpally and the surrounding villages including Yadavally. It also has a good infrastructure for industries. There are several factories like OCTL, Heritage milk factory, USTL and others located there. Nalgonda district is home to Mahathma Gandhi University and a police academy located just 7 km away from the village. Dr. A.S. Narayana sir and Mother Therissa foundations are helping for our village development. Village youth formed as group and established a society called - Our Village & Our development to give awareness on education and Village development. Yadavally is located approximately 70 km from Hyderabad (the state capital of Telangana). Near to the village there is an APSRTC Narketpally, bus depot and bus stand. Yadavally is a Graam panchayat and 3 small villages come under this grama panchayat. They are: * Naibai( reddys colony) * Pothineni pally * surya nagar It has 1 sarpanch and 10 ward members. Sarpanch - Bokka Bhupal reddy Yadavally village comes under Assembly constitution nakerkal (MLA- chrimurthy lingaiha )and Parliament constitution Bhuvanagiri (MP - kvr). Temples in Village: * The Hanuman temple in middle of the village * Muthyala temple in naibai is beautiful place too see in naibai * The Ganga devamma temple Hanuman temple naibai Yadavally has a large pond of approximately 100 acres, and is well known for agriculture, primarily goats and sheep. In naibai village is there big mountain Category:Villages in Nalgonda district 
