Shri Yogi Hari Yogi Hari (born 22 June 1945 in Guayana) is a master of Sampoorna Yoga (Yoga of fullness). He is well known and respected around the world as an exceptionally inspiring teacher and Guru. He comes from the Sivananda lineage. == Biography == At the age of 22 he was labeled as a medically incurable. By the grace of God he was introduced to Yoga and he knew right away that this was what he should be living and practicing in his life. For eight years he practiced with intense dedication and in that time he transformed his whole body into a state of perfect health. Yogi Hari is like an ocean that can never have enough of this divine science and he longed to meet his Guru. In 1975 he had the blessing of meeting his Gurus, Swami Vishnudevananda and Swami Nadabrahmananda and at that time he retired from the worldly life and spent 7 years in the Sivananda Ashram where he immersed himself fully in yoga sadhana. That was a time of great transformation on all levels. Yogi Hari studied the science of Nada yoga for 14 years from the great master, Swami Nadabrahmananda. He has since then continued to immerse himself in the practice of Nada Yoga and created many inspiring and uplifting CDs and instructional books and DVDs on the science of Nada Yoga. He currently lives and teaches at his ashram in Miramar, Florida. == Works == Sampoorna Yoga is the fruit of Yogi Hari's tireless striving for perfection in his practice and teaching. It is the yoga of fullness that intelligently integrates Hatha, Raja, Karma, Bhakti, Jnana and Nada Yoga to purify and harmonize all aspects of the human personality, so that the light of the soul shines forth in its divine splendour. His approach is deep, simple and practical and helps people from every background to live a richer and happier life based on lasting yogic values. The basic teaching is that health, peace and joy are already within you. They are your birthright. Sampoorna Yoga can help you to uncover them. Yogi Hari is the author of 4 books and has recorded over 56 musical albums. He also produced a series of instructional videos, "Sampoorna Hatha Yoga at Home with Yogi Hari", and "Nada Yoga at Home with Yogi Hari." == Selected bibliography == * Sampoorna Yoga, Nada Productions, Inc. (June 1, 2006), * Hatha Yoga Pradipika, Nada Productions, Inc. (June 1, 2006), * Learn 108 Ragas Easily, Nada Productions (2011), * Bhajans, Kirtans, Shlokas and Chants, Nada Productions, Inc. (January 1, 1991), == External links == * yogihari.com Category:1945 births Category:20th-century Hindu religious leaders Category:21st-century Hindu religious leaders Category:Living people 
