Young Investment Group (YIG) is a private company established in 1998 in Burma employing more than 6000 local workers and operating 16 subsidiaries in Myanmar, China and Singapore. ==YIG Business Sectors== The conglomerate is involved in business sectors in Myanmar ranging from trading and automobile to insurance and micro-finance The business sectors are: * Insurance: YIG conduct its insurance business via Young Insurance Global Co. Ltd. (license entity Great Future International Insurance Co) . It is one of the 12 companies in Myanmar that is awarded the insurance license by the government. * Finance: YIG is also one of the companies in the country to be awarded a finance license by the Burma Government. The company engage in SME financing and also have a separate entity providing Micro-financing. * IT & Telecom: YIG telecom division provide site survey and installation. It is also involved in the country's BTS deployment projects. * Energy: YIG have an oil and gas exploration division handling E&P;, Surveying and Logistics, and a Hydro Power division which is involved in the Myitha and Yazagyo Hydropower projects. On 10 Oct 2013, the Myanmar Ministry of Energy announced that YIG Joint venture company, Pacific Hunt Energy Corp, won 2 key PSC blocks in Indaw-Yenan and Taungoo-Pyinmana area. Other winners of the other blocks include other key energy players such as Eni and Petronas Carigali. *Automobile: Established since 2002, YIG automobile division Young's Auto is one of the earliest and major car importer of Myanmar. * Trading: The trading arm of YIG handles the import of heavy machinery, construction materials and automobiles and the export of manufactured goods. * Mining: YIG mining companies are one of the major companies in Burma involved in rubies and jade mining. In addition to precious gems mining, the company has also mine gold and minerals. * Manufacturing: YIG has factories producing manufactured goods. It also have Gin factories in the Magway and Mandalay regions * Construction: The company construction arm is involved in real estate development, infrastructure, housing and factory construction * TV broadcasting: YTV free to air channel ==References== Category:Conglomerate companies of Myanmar Category:Holding companies established in 1998 Category:1998 establishments in Myanmar 
