Zuerst! (First! in English) is a monthly German news magazine published in Germany. The magazine has a far-right-wing political stance. ==History== Zuerst! was founded in January 2010 as a successor to the now-defunct Nation und Europa magazine. It was supported by right-wing publishers in Germany. The publisher of the magazine was Lesen und Schenken. At that time the distributor of the magazine was Bauer media group which also owned it later. In September 2012, the group sold Zuerst! due to criticism by Der Spiegel. Editors of the magazine also write for other right-wing publications. The former editor-in- chief of Zuerst! is Gunther Deschner. The current editor-in-chief is Manuel Ochsenreiter. The monthly, which provides news on the economy, current affairs, travel and culture, is also distributed in Austria, Luxembourg, Switzerland and South Tyrol. ==Political leaning and controversy== Zuerst reported its political leaning and policy as follows: "The German news magazine ZUERST! will serve German - not foreign - interests." Immediately after its first issue the State Office for the Protection of the Constitution announced that the content of the magazine was against the "unending de- nazification efforts", advocating revisionist theories on national boundaries, and the terrorist activities of the "South Tirolean Freedom Fighters" in the 1960s. In 2019 the editor Manuel Ochsenreiter was accused of sponsoring a group of radical Poles who staged a false flag arson attack of Hungarian culture center in Uzhhorod in order to discredit the government of Ukraine. The Poles testified in court that Ochsenreiter, who had long lasting ties to Russian government and separatists in Ukraine, passed them money and instructed them as to the way of conducting the arson for it to have most media impact. ==See also== * List of magazines in Germany ==References== ==External links== * Official website Category:2010 establishments in Germany Category:Bauer Media Group Category:German-language magazines Category:Magazines established in 2010 Category:Monthly magazines published in Germany Category:Neo-Nazi publications Category:News magazines published in Germany Category:Political magazines published in Germany 
