Firequake is a 2014 Canadian-United States low-budget action/science fiction/thriller/disaster television film directed by Geoff P. Browne. The film was generally poorly received. ==Synopsis== Nikki Carter travels to Benesov, Czech Republic, to live with her mother Dr Eve Carter after her dad has a heart attack. Eve is a scientist who has developed a new clean version of coal which can be burnt to produce vast amounts of electricity. Nikki doesn't have a relationship with her mother, as Eve abandoned Nikki and her dad 12 years ago. The scientists conduct a test of the Helios system using an inert mixture, but a valve bursts under the pressure which needs to be repaired. Eve tells everyone to delay the launch, but after she has gone home Declan tells them to start up the system using the highly flammable Helios mixture. Nikki arrives at the airport and gets shown around by the landlords, Henrich and Olivia. Eve arrives at the house but Nikki isn't happy to see her and goes to her bedroom to spend time by herself. Declan and Killian turn up at the house, explaining to Eve that they have launched Helios, but are getting strange readings and need Eve's help. Eve goes with Declan and Killian, they try to shut the Helios system down but the whole system blows up in a massive explosion. The effects devastate the surrounding area both above and below ground. Killian and his colleagues go underground to manually shut down the system, but are unsuccessful. The Hellios has flooded into the coal mines under Prague, which could blow at any time. Declan evacuates the building leaving Killian and his colleagues trapped underground, attempting cover up his bad decisions. Eve heads back home to get Nikki safety, however Henrich and Olivia decide to stay. Declan phones Eve and tells her Killian and his Colleagues are dead, and advises her to keep quiet about what has happened. However Killian isn't dead, and he is attempting to get his colleagues out of the underground chambers using and escape tunnel. Eve and Nikki escape in their car. Nikki hears Duncan on the news blaming Eve for the explosions, she gets Eve to stop the car and tries to run off. Explosions go off around them and they both retreat to the car. The car gets caught in a sink hole and they both get trapped and are knocked unconscious. They are rescued by the army, and taken to an emergency medical camp. Declan is looking for Eve, he goes to Eve's house finding Henrich and Olivia there. They know that Declan caused the explosions so he shoots them both to cover up his tracks. Nikki is a diabetic, and loses her insulin kit in the car crash. Eve takes a motorbike and takes Nikki to a nearby town to find a pharmacy. Captain Hill, an army captain, tells Eve that her name is all over the news for causing the explosion. He gives her a gun so she can protect herself. Declan turns up at the medical camp asking where Eve has gone, and they direct him after her. Declan finds Eve and Nikki as they run into a building. They manage to escape from the building and drive off on the motorbike. Killian contacts Eve via the radio, telling her that he is still alive. Eve tells him of a plan she has to flood the underground chambers using the nearby Dam, to put out the fires. Killian finally finds the escape shaft to the surface. They stop at a Gas Station, a lady is hiding inside with a gun, Nikki manages to get the electricity back on, and the news comes on saying Eve is a wanted suspect for causing the explosions. The police turn up, as they come in Eve and Nikki sneak out the back and steal the police car to escape, heading for the water Dam. They arrive at the Dam, closely followed by Declan, and the army who are trying to capture Eve. Declan follows them into the Dam and starts shooting at Eve. Eve finds the Dam control room, and tells the engineers that releasing the water from the Dam will flood the underground chambers putting out the fire. They are just about to open the Dam when Declan turns up, threatening to shoot Nikki. The army turns up and tells him and Eve to put down their guns. Declan tries to shoot Eve and the soldiers kill him. They release the water from the Dam which successfully puts out the fires. Killian escapes from the underground chambers, and tells everyone the truth about Declan causing the fires by launching the Helios project too early. All charges against Eve are dropped, and Nikki decides to stay living with her, instead of returning to California. Six months later, Eve has set up a restaurant, while Nikki manages the restaurant's blog. ==Cast== * Alexandra Paul as Dra. Eve Carter * Zoe Barker as Nikki Carter * Nigel Barber as Declan Glas * James Weber Brown as Killian * Kicker Robinson as Copper * Kirsty Mitchell as Slater Cappilla * Luke Cousins as Goldman * Derek Morse as Capt. Hill * Terry Randall as Henrich * Marianne Stanicheva as Olivia * Amy Dincuff as Host * Gergana Stoyanova as Marta * Valentin Ganev as Zeleny * Hristo Balabanov as Dam Operator * Jonas Talkington as Reporter ==Reception== A critical review from the radio times gave the film 2/5, a critical review from Moria rated the film at 1/5, Digi Guide gave the film a rating of 2/5. ==References== ==External links== * * Category:2014 television films Category:2014 action thriller films Category:2014 science fiction action films Category:American films Category:Canadian films Category:Science fiction television films Category:Action television films Category:American disaster films Category:Canadian disaster films Category:Films set in the Czech Republic Category:Films set in Prague Category:Films shot in Bulgaria 
