DreamWorks Theatre is a motion simulator attraction that opened on June 15, 2018 at Universal Studios Hollywood located in the Universal City, California community of Los Angeles. The new attraction is themed around characters featured in films from DreamWorks Animation and features the use of projection mapping. It replaced the Shrek 4-D attraction, which closed on August 13, 2017. ==Background== Following NBCUniversal's purchase of DreamWorks Animation for $3.8 billion in 2016, it sought to leverage its newly acquired intellectual properties. On June 5, 2017, Universal Studios Hollywood announced the new DreamWorks Theatre attraction would open in 2018 based on characters featured in DreamWorks Animation films, which replaced the Shrek 4-D attraction on August 13. NBCUniversal issued a press release regarding the DreamWorks Theatre attraction: The attraction preshow features a variety of DreamWorks characters, including Shrek, Donkey, Gingy, and the Magic Mirror from Shrek, as well as characters from Trolls, and Madagascar. The theater uses projection mapping on the interior walls of the theater, using a total of seven Christie 4K Boxer Cinema Projectors, surround sound audio, and physical effects such as water, wind, and articulating seats that pivot and tilt. == Kung Fu Panda: The Emperor's Quest == The first attraction to show in the venue is Kung Fu Panda: The Emperor's Quest, which is based on the Kung Fu Panda franchise. It takes place on the morning of The Emperor's Great Feast of Heroes, where dragon warrior Po the Panda embarks on a quest to deliver the Liquid of Limitless Power to the Palace. It includes "raging rapids, river pirates, awesome magic and, obviously, Kung Fu." The film was developed in collaboration with DreamWorks, and it features the original voice cast from Kung Fu Panda. The attraction opened on June 15, 2018. ==References== Category:Universal Studios Hollywood Category:Universal Pictures animated films Category:Universal Parks & Resorts attractions by name Category:Universal Parks & Resorts films Category:2018 animated films Category:2010s American animated films Category:American films Category:2010s animated short films Category:4D films Category:2018 in film Category:Kung Fu Panda Category:Madagascar (franchise) Category:DreamWorks Animation in amusement parks Category:Amusement park attractions based on film franchises Category:2018 establishments in California 
