Gulru Necipoglu (born 3 April 1956 in Istanbul) is a Turkish American professor of Islamic Art/Architecture. She has been the Aga Khan Professor and Director of the Aga Khan Program for Islamic Architecture at Harvard University since 1993, where she started teaching as Assistant Professor in 1987. She received her Harvard Ph.D. in the Department of History of Art and Architecture (1986), her BA in Art History at Wesleyan (Summa Cum Laude, 1979), her high school degree in Robert College, Istanbul (1975). She is married to the Ottoman historian and Harvard University professor Cemal Kafadar. Necipoglu is an elected member of the American Philosophical Society, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the British Academy, and Centro Internazionale di Studi di Archittettura Andrea Palladio in Vicenza. She was an invited faculty scholar at Kunsthistorisches Institut in Florenz-Max- Planck-Institut (2013, 2014), and the Slade Professor of Fine Art at the University of Cambridge (2013). Her prize-winning books are: The Arts of Ornamental Geometry (2017); The Age of Sinan (2005), The Topkapi Scroll (1996). Her books and numerous essays have appeared in English, Turkish, French, Spanish, Persian, and Arabic. Necipoglu specializes in premodern Islamic arts/architecture, especially the Mediterranean and Eastern Islamic lands. Her publications address aesthetic cosmopolitanism, transregional connectivity between early modern empires (Ottoman, Safavid, Mughal), artistic exchanges with Byzantium and Renaissance Europe, plans, and drawings in pre- modern architectural practice, aesthetics of abstraction, and geometric ornament. Her critical interests encompass methodological and historiographical issues in modern constructions of the field of Islamic art and Orientalism. ==Career and Works== Necipoglu graduated from the Robert College of Istanbul in 1975. She received a degree in art history with a concentration on Late Medieval and Renaissance periods from Wesleyan University in 1979. She attended the Williams College junior-year exchange program in 1978. In 1982, she received a master's degree in Islamic art and architecture from Harvard University, where she obtained her Ph.D. in 1986 with a dissertation titled, The Formation of an Ottoman Imperial Tradition: The Topkapi Palace in the 15th and 16th Centuries, under the supervision of Oleg Grabar. Her Ph.D. dissertation was the winner of the King Fahd Grand Prize for Excellence of Research in Islamic Architecture (1986). Based on her research project as Mellon Post-Doctoral Fellow at Columbia University (1986-87), she published "The Life of an Imperial Monument: Hagia Sophia after Byzantium," in Hagia Sophia: From the Age of Justinian to the Present, ed. Robert Mark and Ahmet Cakmak (1992). An abridged Turkish translation of this now timely study appeared in Toplumsal Tarih 254 (2015). One of Necipoglu's earliest articles, "Plans and Models in 15th and 16th-Century Ottoman Architectural Practice" won the Society of Architectural Historians Best Article by a Young Author prize (1986). Her article, "Suleyman the Magnificent and the Representation of Power in the Context of Ottoman-Hapsburg-Papal Rivalry" was awarded the Best Article Published in any Discipline prize by the Turkish Studies Association (1991). Her first book Architecture, Ceremonial and Power: The Topkapi Palace in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries (MIT, 1991) was supported by grants from the Architectural History Foundation and College Art Association. Aptullah Kuran's book jacket endorsement judges this study as "One of the principal works about Ottoman architectural history." The author's novel analytical synthesis is praised in Howard Crane's 1996 review: "It is the great strength of Professor Necipoglu's book that she elaborates in a lucid and precise manner this connection between architectural form and function, a physical arrangement and symbolism. Architecture, Ceremonial, and Power is a model of both exacting scholarship and thoughtful interpretation, and serves to bring to life that monument which is surely one of the keys to the understanding of the Ottoman concept of imperial absolutism."Howard Crane, Book Review, Journal of the American Oriental Society 116/2 (1996): 327-28. The extensive corpus of primary sources introduced in the book reveal the dialogues and parallelisms between Byzantine, Italianate, Islamicate-Ottoman architectural cultures and practices. Priscilla Soucek states in her 1994 review that "Necipoglu has provided a solid foundation for future consideration of matters relating to Ottoman palatial architecture and court ceremonial, a truly admirable achievement."Priscilla P. Soucek, Book Review, Renaissance Quarterly 47/2 (1994): 463-66. This book, accepted as "a landmark" in the field, is one the earliest scholarly attempts to interpret the architectural program of the Topkapi Palace in Istanbul.John Carswell, Book Review, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 6/1 (1996): 109-111. Necipoglu's reading of this allegedly "modest" monument's ambitious imperial agenda opened up new vistas for studies on Islamic palatial architecture (a subject broadly explored in her edited volume, Palaces in the Pre-Modern Islamic World, Special Issue, Ars Orientalis, vol. 23, 1993, containing her introduction, "Shifting Paradigms in the Palatial Architecture of the Pre- Modern Islamic World," and her influential essay, "Framing of the Gaze in Ottoman, Safavid, and Mughal Palaces." The Turkish translation of her book, 15. ve 16. yuzyilda Topkapi Sarayi: Mimari, Toren ve Iktidar, was published in 2007 (reprint 2014). Necipoglu's The Topkapi Scroll--Geometry and Ornament in Islamic Architecture (Getty, 1995) won the "Best New Book on Architecture and Urban Planning" award of the Association of American Publishers.The Topkapi Scroll--Geometry and Ornament in Islamic Architecture (The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, distributed by Oxford University Press, 1995). For online access see https://www.getty.edu/publications/virtuallibrary/9780892363353.html In 1996, it received two further awards: the Spiro Kostof Book Award for Architecture and Urbanism from the Society of Architectural Historians, and the Albert Hourani Book Award of the Middle East Studies Association. The book interprets central defining themes of Islamic art such as geometric ornament and the muqarnas, through the hitherto overlooked centrality of designs on paper in premodern architectural practice. It features the facsimile of a unique 30-meter design scroll, with two- and three-dimensional geometric patterns and calligraphy for architectural ornament, which she attributes to late fifteenth-century Timurid-Turkmen Iran, particularly Tabriz. Her book demonstrates the crucial role of mathematical sciences in the theory and practice of architecture and the ornamental geometric mode known as girih.Yvonne Dold-Samplonius, Book Review, Historia Mathematica 26/2 (1999): 166-172. Also see Ann Powell, "Neoplatonism and Geometry in Islamic Art," Art History21/1: (1998):135-139. In his book review, Walter Denny remarks that "This theme of relation between science and art in Islam has been so often repeated in survey texts as to have become almost a cliche, but the actual relationships between theoretical studies and what Necipoglu calls 'practical geometry' used in the creation of art have never before been carefully and meticulously linked to this degree in the literature."Walter B. Denny, Book Review, Speculum 73/2 (1998): 566-568. In her seminal work, Necipoglu challenges orientalist and reductionist assumptions regarding the meaning and function of geometry in Islamic art. She investigates in depth the intellectual and cultural contexts of the scroll, exploring multiple meanings and perceptions of geometrical designs in line with philosophical and aesthetic theories current in the medieval Islamic world. Oleg Grabar's book jacket endorsement reads, "Just about the best book on Islamic art for the past one hundred years. It is a masterpiece that establishes our understanding of why geometry became so important in Islamic art." According to Priscilla Soucek, the book "goes far beyond the explication of a set of architectural drawings. Its ambitious scope and painstaking documentation provide a new foundation for considering the role of geometric ornament in the visual traditions of the medieval Islamic world, and indeed initiate a wider debate about how to interpret the other ornamental traditions used in pre-modern Islamic regions."Priscilla Soucek, Book Review, International Journal of Middle East Studies 30/1 (1998): 131-133. Godfrey Goodwin lauds Necipoglu's intellectual analysis as "immaculate" and remarks that "For anyone seriously studying Islamic art and the concepts underlying it, this work is and will be essential reading. New details may be added in time, but it will not be surpassed. It creates its own infinity."Godfrey Goodwin, Book Review, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 6/3 (1996): 434-435. The Topkapi Scroll was translated into Persian in 2000. The Getty Virtual Library provides a full copy of the book in English. A related subject is explored in Necipoglu's edited book (Brill, 2017), The Arts of Ornamental Geometry: A Persian Compendium on Similar and Complementary Interlocking Figures, beginning with her opening essay, "Ornamental Geometries: An Anonymous Persian Compendium at the Intersection of the Visual Arts and Mathematical Sciences." This book was selected one of the best new works in the field of Islamic / Iranian Studies, and was a winner of the "26th World Award for Book of the Year" of Iran's Ministry of Culture.The Arts of Ornamental Geometry: A Persian Compendium on Similar and Complementary Interlocking Figures, ed. Gulru Necipoglu (Supplements to Muqarnas, vol. 13, Leiden: Brill, 2017). See http://bookaward.ir/BookDetails-En/3151/10/%20The-Arts-of-Ornamental-Geometry- A-Persian-Compendium-on-Similar-and-Complementary-Interlocking-Figures It includes the facsimile of a unique medieval document in Persian (c. 1300) containing geometrical drawings of complex patterns and muqarnas, with practical textual instructions on how to draw them.See https://brill.com/view/title/32181 Since its publication, the book became a significant source for historians of art, architecture, and history of science as well as mathematicians, physicists, artists, and architects.Patricia Blessing, Book Review, Iranian Studies, 2019. Necipoglu's 2005 book (Reaktion, second edn. 2011), The Age of Sinan: Architectural Culture in the Ottoman Empire received the Albert Hourani Book Award (Honorable Mention), and the Fuat Koprulu Book Prize of Turkish Studies Association. Its expanded Turkish translation, Sinan Cagi: Osmanli Imparatorlugu'nda Mimari Kultur (Bilgi, 2013, reprint 2017) received the Necip Fazil Book Award in the field of Best Original Research (2014). The book attracted world-wide acclaim for its innovative interpretation of works by the renowned chief architect Sinan (d. 1588), from the perspective of his "codification of decorum" in canonical Ottoman architecture according to the "relative status of patrons and building sites."For an interview with Necipoglu on the Age of Sinan, see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lI9w68K6Glw Previous scholarship on Sinan's oeuvre was dominated by the chronological development of his style, as Howard Crane notes, "It is the great strength of Necipoglu's work that she transcends this formalist paradigm and, by means of a truly groundbreaking examination of the rich but hitherto unexplored corpus of surviving documentary sources - archival records, vakfiyes, contemporary historical, diplomatic, and travel accounts - establishes the historical context for the chief architect's work."Howard Crane, Book Review, Journal of Islamic Studies 20/2 (2009): 274-277. The approach in this book is considered a break from established paradigms.Cigdem Kafescioglu, Book Review, Renaissance Studies 20/4 (2006): 576-579. It situates Ottoman architectural culture in the larger early modern Mediterranean region and sheds light on cross-cultural dialogues with Italian Renaissance architecture.Cigdem Kafescioglu, Book Review, Renaissance Studies 20/4 (2006): 576-579. In her review, Catherine Asher concludes, "The volume is a magnum opus concerning sixteenth-century Ottoman Turkey. Necipoglu has produced a work encyclopedic in scope, providing tremendous new and illuminating insight on Sinan and his milieu."Catherine Asher, Book Review, Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 66/2 (2007); 246-248. Necipoglu has been the editor of the journal Muqarnas: An Annual on the Visual Cultures of the Islamic World since 1993, vols. 10-37 (Brill), and its Supplements. Her edited books on diverse subjects include, Histories of Ornament: From Global to Local (Princeton, 2016) co-edited with Alina Payne. This volume was hailed "the first major global history of ornament from the Middle Ages to today," offering a novel critical interpretation of the histories of ornament in a global perspective.https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691167282/histories- of-ornament It is acclaimed as a pioneering work providing "a remarkable new perspective on the study of ornament."Sebastien Bontemps, Book Review, Renaissance Quarterly 70/2 (2017): 665-666. Also see Younes Saramifar, Book Review, Journal of Design History 30/2 (2017): 235-237. The essays provide original interpretations on the function of ornament, raising broader questions on historiography, transcultural exchanges, agency, materiality, intermediality, ornament and abstraction, portability, and the circulation of concepts, forms, goods, and people.Kathleen James-Chakraborty, Book Review, Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 76 /1 (2017): 107-108.. Necipoglu co-edited with F. Barry Flood A Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture, (Wiley Blackwell Companions to Art History, 2 vols., 2017). With over fifty commissioned essays, it has become an essential handbook for professors, students, and enthusiasts. The volumes are organized according to a new chronological-geographical paradigm that challenges existing scholarship and notably remaps the field by providing a historical-critical approach. The co-authors' introductory essay explains this reconceptualization, "Frameworks of Islamic Art and Architectural History: Concepts, Approaches, and Historiographies.""Frameworks of Islamic Art and Architectural History: Concepts, Approaches, and Historiographies" in A Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture, 2 vols., ed. Finbarr Barry Flood and Gulru Necipoglu, Wiley Blackwell Companions to Art History (Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2017), 2-56. Most recently, Necipoglu co-edited with two major historians Cemal Kafadar and Cornell Fleischer, Treasures of Knowledge: An Inventory of the Ottoman Palace Library, 1502/3- 1503/4 (Brill, 2019). This two-volume work focuses on a fascinating manuscript preserved in the Library of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences in Budapest, which catalogs the book collection of the Ottoman Sultans Mehmed II and Bayezid II kept in the Topkapi Palace Treasury, prepared by the court librarian. Necipoglu's introductory essay interprets this document from diverse angles, "The Spatial Organization of Knowledge in the Ottoman Palace Library: An Encyclopedic Collection and Its Inventory." The 28 essays in vol. 1, over 1,000 pages, analyze books written in Arabic, Persian, Turkish, and "Mongolian," on specific fields of knowledge, according to which the inventory was organized, spanning from rational theology, Islamic jurisprudence, Sufism, ethics, and politics, to literature and the mathematical sciences. Vol. 2 provides a facsimile with transliteration. Fabrizio Speziale recognizes the work as a major contribution to the study of "the history, the role, and the organization of libraries in Muslim societies, as well as their links with other Muslim cultural and political institutions, which remain topics still insufficiently studied in recent scholarship."Fabrizio Speziale, Book Review, Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 83/1 (2020): 144-146. Konrad Hirschler's review of this "massive" and "ground-breaking study that will remain with us for many decades," judges it "a wonderful book that is a must-read for anyone interested in Ottoman studies or the history of ideas or libraries."Konrad Hirschler, Book Review, Journal of the Ottoman and Turkish Studies Association, 7/ 1 (Spring 2020): 244-249. Necipoglu's name was given to a new lecture hall of the Art History Department of Akdeniz University, Turkey in 2012. In 2014, she was mentioned among the 91 most influential women in the history of the Turkish Republic on its 91st anniversary celebration.See Hurriyet, 29 October 2014, special issue: 91 Years 91 Women 2014. She was invited by His Highness the Aga Khan to serve as a member of the steering committee of the Aga Khan Architecture Award for the 3-year cycle 2015-2018. == External Links == * For a detailed curriculum vitae and publications (downloadable) see Harvard University Faculty Website * For publications (downloadable) see academia.edu profile * "The Age of Sinan: Architectural Culture in the Ottoman Empire," filmed interview discussion. * "Interview with Professor Gulru Necipoglu," by Gizem Tongo, the Graduate Journal of the History Department, Bogazici University, Istanbul (2010). * "Sinan: A Divine Architect," a video documentary, directed by Remmelt Lukkien (DVD, Lasso Film & TV Production, with AVRO TV and VOX POPULI Films, 2008). ===Books and Edited Volumes=== * Editor of Muqarnas: An Annual on the Visual Cultures of the Islamic World (Leiden and Boston: Brill, since 1993). * Editor of Studies and Sources on Islamic Art and Architecture: Supplements to Muqarnas (Leiden and Boston: Brill, since 1993) * Treasures of Knowledge: An Inventory of the Ottoman Palace Library (1502/3-1503/4), 2 vols., ed. Gulru Necipoglu, Cemal Kafadar, Cornell H. Fleischer (Supplements to Muqarnas, vol. 14, Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2019). * A Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture, ed. Finbarr Barry Flood and Gulru Necipoglu, Wiley Blackwell Companions to Art History, 2 vols. (Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2017). * The Arts of Ornamental Geometry: A Persian Compendium on Similar and Complementary Interlocking Figures, ed. Gulru Necipoglu (Supplements to Muqarnas, vol. 13, Leiden: Brill, 2017). * Histories of Ornament: From Global to Local, ed. Gulru Necipoglu and Alina Payne (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2016). * Sinan Cagi: Osmanli Imparatorlugu'nda Mimari Kultur, trans. Gul Cagali-Guven, (Istanbul: Bilgi University Press, 2013, second edn. 2017): Expanded Turkish translation of The Age of Sinan: Architectural Culture in the Ottoman Empire (London: Reaktion Books, 2006, second edn. 2011). * Sinan's Autobiographies: Five Sixteenth-Century Texts. Introductory Notes, Critical Editions, and Translations by Howard Crane and Esra Akin. Edited with a Preface by Gulru Necipoglu (Supplements to Muqarnas, vol. 11, Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2006). *The Age of Sinan: Architectural Culture in the Ottoman Empire (London: Reaktion Books, with Princeton University Press, 2005). [Revised second edition, London: Reaktion Books, with the University of Chicago Press, 2011]. *15. ve 16. Yuzyilda Topkapi Sarayi: Mimari, Toren ve Iktidar, trans. Rusen Sezer (Yapi ve Kredi Bankasi, Istanbul, 2007, reprint 2014). *Persian Translation of The Topkapi Scroll book by Mihrdad Qayyumi Bidhindi, Handasa va Tazyin dar Mi'mari-yi Islami: Tomar-i Topkapi (Tehran: Kitabkhana-yi Milli-yi Iran, 1379). *The Topkapi Scroll--Geometry and Ornament in Islamic Architecture, The Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities, distributed by Oxford University Press, 1995. [The Getty Virtual Library link to the full copy of the book The Topkapi Scroll--Geometry and Ornament in Islamic Architecture is: https://www.getty.edu/publications/virtuallibrary/9780892363353.html. It is also linked on the Gulru Necipoglu Harvard University publications page. * Palaces in the Pre-Modern Islamic World, ed. Gulru Necipoglu, Special Issue of Ars Orientalis, 23 (1993), with her introduction and essay: "Shifting Paradigms in the Palatial Architecture of the Pre-Modern Islamic World" (3-27); "Framing of the Gaze in Ottoman, Safavid, and Mughal Palaces" (303-42). *Architecture, Ceremonial and Power: The Topkapi Palace in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries (Boston: M.I.T. and The Architectural History Foundation, 1991). ===Selected Recent Essays=== * "Transregional Connections: Architecture and the Construction of Early Modern Islamic Empires," forthcoming in Roda Ahluwalia ed., The Art & Culture of Mughal India: New Studies (New Delhi, 2021). * "The Aesthetics of Empire: Arts, Politics, and Commerce in the Construction of Sultan Suleyman's Magnificence," in ed. Pal Fodor, The Battle for Central Europe (Leiden, 2019). * "Architectural Dialogues Across the Eastern Mediterranean: Domed Sanctuaries in the Ottoman Empire and Renaissance Italy," in ed. Alina Payne, The Companion to the History of Architecture: Renaissance and Baroque (Princeton, 2017). * "Early Modern Floral: The Agency of Ornament in Ottoman and Safavid Visual Cultures," in Histories of Ornament: From Global to Local, eds. Gulru Necipoglu and Alina Payne (Princeton, 2016). * "Persianate Images between Europe and China: The 'Frankish Manner' in the Diez and Topkapi Albums, c. 1350-1450," in The Diez Albums, eds. Julia Gonella, Friederike Weis, Christoph Rauch (Leiden, 2016). * "Mimar Sinan Caginda Mimarlik Kulturu ve Adab: Gunumuze Yonelik Yorumlar (Architectural Culture and Decorum in the Age of Sinan: Interpretations with a View to Our Times," in eds. Hatice Aynur and A. Hilal Ugurlu, Ekrem Hakki Ayverdi'nin Hatirasina Osmanli Mimarlik Kulturu (Istanbul, 2016). * "The Scrutinizing Gaze in the Aesthetics of Islamic Visual Cultures: Sight, Insight and Desire," Muqarnas 32 (2015). * "Connectivity, Mobility and 'Portable Archaeology': Pashas from the Dalmatian Hinterland as Cultural Mediators," in ed. Alina Payne, Dalmatia and the Mediterranean. Portable Archaeology and the Poetics of Influence (Leiden, 2014). * "Visual Cosmopolitanism and Creative Translation: Artistic Conversations with Renaissance Italy in Mehmed II's Constantinople," Muqarnas 29 (2012). * "The Concept of Islamic Art: Inherited Discourses and New Approaches," in Islamic Art and the Museum: Approaches to Art and Archaeology of the Muslim World in the Twenty-First Century, eds. Benoit Junod, Georges Khalil, Stefan Weber, Gerhard Wolf (London, 2012). Electronically reproduced in The Journal of Art Historiography, 2012, vol. 6. == References == Category:1956 births Category:Living people Category:People from Istanbul Category:Members of the American Philosophical Society Category:Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Category:Harvard University faculty Category:Harvard University alumni Category:Alumni of Arnavutkoy American High School for Girls Category:Wesleyan University alumni Category:Historians of Islamic art 
